Let Life Insurance Riders Drive Your Coverage
Life insurance tackles numerous needs at different stages of your life. With increased income and a much higher standard of living, it becomes crucial to maintain the most suitable insurance protection for you and your family. However, you need to be careful that you do not own excessive insurance. To cut premium costs, it is always a good idea to get a rider at economical rates. Riders provide several kinds of insurance protection. Of course, for that you have to meet the rider's outlined conditions. 
In this article, we will delve into various types of riders and discuss the ways they can drastically affect the way you buy life insurance. (For related reading, see Buying Life Insurance: Term Versus Permanent.)

What is a rider? 
Riders are the additional benefits that can be bought and added to a basic insurance policy. These options allow you to increase your insurance coverage or limit the coverage set down by the policy. Riders can be blended, for an additional cost, according to your present and future insurance needs. However, buying a rider means paying an extra premium for this supplementary benefit. Generally, this premium is low because relatively little underwriting is required.

When a claim for the benefits of a rider is made, it can result in the termination of the rider, while the original policy continues to insure you as usual.

Please take note that the insurance coverage, premium rates, terms and conditions of riders may differ from one insurer to another.

Here are the most common life insurance riders and what you should know about them:

1. Guaranteed Insurability Rider (a.k.a Renewal Provision)
This rider allows you to purchase additional insurance coverage along with your base policy in the stated period without the need for further medical examination. This rider is most beneficial when there has been a significant change in your life circumstances, such the birth of your child, marriage or an increase in your income. Another advantage is that in case your health state declines with increasing age, you will be able to apply for extra coverage without giving any evidence of insurability. Sometimes this rider may also provide a renewal of your base policy at the end of its term without medical checkups. This rider may end at a certain age. (For related reading, see Life Insurance Clauses Determine Your Coverage.)

2. Spouse Insurance Rider
As the name suggests, this rider offers term insurance for your spouse for an additional premium.

3. Accidental Death or Double Indemnity Rider 
This rider pays out an additional amount of death benefit if the insured dies as a result of an accident. Normally, the additional benefit paid out upon death due to accident is equivalent to the face amount of the original policy, which doubles the benefit. Therefore, upon death due to accidental bodily injury, the insured's family gets twice the amount of the policy. That's why this rider is called a double indemnity rider. Just make sure that you understand the restrictions on this rider as many insurance companies limit the meaning of the term "accident". If you are the sole income provider for your family, this rider is ideal for you because the double benefit will take good care of your surviving family's expenses in your absence.

4. Waiver of Premium Rider 
Under this rider, the future premiums are waived off if the insured becomes permanently disabled or loses his or her income as a result of injury or illness prior to a specified age. Disability of the main bread-earner can have the most crippling effect on a family. In these circumstances, this rider exempts the insured from paying the premium due on the base policy until he or she is ready to work again. This rider can be valuable, particularly when the premium on your policy is quite high. Without this rider, you are at risk of lapsing you. Here too, the definition of the term "totally disabled" may vary from one insurer to another, so you need to be aware of the terms and conditions of this rider. (To learn more, see Protecting Your Income Source.)

5. Family Income Benefit Rider 
In case the insured dies, this rider will provide a steady flow of income to family members. When buying this rider, you need to determine the number of years your family is going to receive this income benefit. The merit of having this rider is obvious: In case of death, the surviving family will face fewer financial difficulties thanks to the regular monthly income from the rider.

6. Accelerated Death Benefit Rider 
An insured person can use the death benefits under this rider if he or she is diagnosed with a terminal illness that will considerably shorten the insured's lifespan. On the whole, insurers may advance 25-40% of the death benefit of the base policy to the insured. At this juncture, you need to know that insurance companies may subtract the amount you receive, plus interest, from what your beneficiaries may receive on your death. This may eventually reduce the death benefit under the policy. Most often, a small amount of premium or, in some cases, no premium is charged for this rider. Different insurers come out with different versions of the definition of "terminal illnesses", so better check what the rider has to offer before opting for it.

7. Child Term Rider 
This rider provides a death benefit in case a child dies before a specified age. After the child attains maturity, the term plan can be converted into permanent insurance with coverage multiplying up to five times the original face amount without the need for medical exams. (To read more about child term rider, see Protect Your Kids and Pets with Custom Insurance.)

8. Long-Term Care Rider 
In the event that the insured's bad health compels him or her to stay at a nursing home or receive home care, this rider offers monthly payments. Although long-term care insurance can be bought individually, insurance companies also offer riders that take care of your long term care costs. (To learn more about this type of insurance, read Long-Term Care Insurance: Who Needs It?, A New Approach To Long-Term Care Insurance and Taking The Surprise Out Of Long-Term Care.)

9. Return of Premium Rider 
The main aim of this rider is to give back most of the premium that you put into your policy. Under this rider, you have to pay a marginally premium and at the end of the term, your premiums are returned back in full. In the event of death, your beneficiaries will receive the paid premium amount. Insurers sell this rider with many variations so verify, the phrasing of the rider before You buy. (For further reading, see Understand Your Insurance Contract.)

Besides the above, there are loads of other riders on the market. Get your insurance advisor to analyze your circumstances and then pick the right kind of rider accordingly.

Conclusion
Buying insurance can be complicated and confusing, but understanding the provisions of your insurance policy are your responsibility. Your insurer may not give you the liberty to modify your insurance policy according to your individual needs, but riders empower you with much-needed control over your ever-changing life situations.So sit down with your insurance advisor to evaluate the benefits of the rider and buy the one that is best-fitted for you and your family.
Life Insurance Policy Riders

Additional coverage can be added to your existing life insurance policy by attaching what is known as a rider. Understanding this important and useful tool is necessary for redesigning your life insurance coverage to suit your needs.
Weighing the cost and the security

Instead of purchasing a life insurance policy that does not quite meet your requirements, we suggest you amend your policy by attaching an insurance rider. Typically riders supplement an existing life insurance policy with more coverage, but a rider can also be made to diminish the coverage outlined by a policy. 

Keep in mind, though, that adding extra services to your life insurance policy may increase your premiums, sometimes substantially. Make sure the coverage is really worth the extra cost. 

On the flip side, eliminating unneeded coverage is an effective way to reduce your cost. If you discover a life insurance policy you like, but it is too expensive for your budget, investigate the possibility of adding a rider to reduce the amount of coverage in an area you consider to be unnecessary.

Common life insurance riders

Some of the most important life insurance riders include the accidental death rider, the guaranteed insurability rider, the waiver of premium rider, and the family income benefit rider. We think you should purchase a life insurance policy that include these riders if you can afford it.

Otherwise, read over the detailed insurance term definitions of each insurance rider below and determine, based on your own situation, which coverage you can do without and which ones you can't.


 Renewal Provision
 Spouse and Children's Insurance Rider
 Withdrawal Provision
 Accidental Death or Double Indemnity Rider
 Waiver of Premium Rider
 Family Income Benefit Rider



 Renewal Provision
(a.k.a. Guaranteed Insurability Rider) When included in your life insurance policy, this provision guarantees the policy's renewability at the end of its term. If you decide to renew your policy, you will not be required to provide additional proof of your insurability. In order to take advantage of this provision, you are often required to renew your policy within a set number of days - you have fewer days to renew as you get older. This insurance rider may also expire at a certain age.
Top


 Spouse and Children's Insurance Rider
An extra policy option that, for a higher premium, offers coverage for your spouse and/or your children.
Top


 Withdrawal Provision
This provision allows you to withdrawal money from your life insurance policy up to the amount of the cash value you have accumulated. However, in doing so, your life insurance policy is reduced by the amount you withdrawal.
Top


 Accidental Death or Double Indemnity Rider
Generally, the addition of this provision doubles your death benefit if you die from an accident. Often the policy will stipulate an age when this coverage will unconditionally expire. Before purchasing a life insurance policy with an accidental death rider, read over the terms and condition. Pay close attention to the insurance company's definition of "accidental", which is often times very restricted. Adding this coverage is relatively inexpensive and may prove to be quite invaluable. However, accidental deaths (especially by the insurance company's definition) are seldom. So, if you want to lower your costs, forgoing accidental death coverage is ideal.
Top


 Waiver of Premium Rider
This extra insurance rider protects your insurance policy from being canceled in certain situations, even if you are unable to pay the premium. Most policies limit the age you can use this rider to being older than 65. If, after you turn 65, you become disabled and are disabled for longer than six months, your premiums will be waived. Usually, the premiums you paid during the six months of disability will be reimbursed, but it depends upon the life insurance policy. Once you are no longer disabled, you are required to resume your premium payments as before. The definition of being disabled varies from policy to policy so read over your insurance company's guidelines. Find out what qualifies as being disabled and how long you are able to retain your policy without paying the premiums. Become familiar with all the details, restrictions, and responsibilities outlined within the policy before agreeing to the extra cost.
Top


 Family Income Benefit Rider
This insurance rider guarantees your family will continue receiving your monthly income if you die. When purchasing a policy with this provision, you choose a length of time you would like to provide this security to your family. As you grow older the duration will decrease and eventually expire. Depending upon the situation, your beneficiaries can choose to receive the amount in a lump sum instead of in monthly increments. This is an invaluable life insurance supplement for families with one income source. In the event of the salaried individual's death, the family will not suddenly be cut off from all sources of income but, instead, will be able to depend upon reliable monthly payments of your death benefit.
10 timely life insurance riders
In addition to the many required legal provisions of a life insurance contract, many life insurance contracts include special provisions, permit special endorsements, and/or allow special riders to be attached to the basic contract. The purpose of these provisions and riders often is to enhance the flexibility and fit of the policy to the policyowner’s needs. However, in some cases, they serve to restrict the policyowner’s options and to limit the insurer’s exposure. Also, some of the standard policy provisions, such as the dividend provision, the nonforfeiture provision, the policy-loan provisions, and the settlement provisions, usually include default options that policyowners may request the insurer

To select the policy or insurance package with the most favorable combination of features one must know not only the options available, but also something about how those options may differ among companies and contracts. As a starting point, here are ten riders you should know about.to replace with other options. However, the options are not uniform among contracts; some companies offer a more restrictive list of choices than others or include other limiting features or provisions.

1. Term rider
The most common and familiar rider is the term insurance rider. When purchasing insurance, buyers may add virtually any form of term insurance — increasing, decreasing, or level — to a base permanent policy. The principal advantage to the insured of using a term rider is that the insurer issues the additional insurance on a net cost basis, without some of the fees typical of new issues. Policyowners frequently use such riders when they have a temporary need above their long-term base need or when the policyowners cannot afford to pay the premiums for a permanent policy for the full amount of insurance they need, but still wish to assure coverage for the full amount of their need.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
Two of the critical elements people seeking insurance should investigate are the current term rates charged by the prospective companies as well as these companies’ maximum guaranteed term rates. Some companies guarantee that their current term rates will never increase. However, their current term rates may be higher than those of companies who reserve the right to increase term rates, subject to a maximum, if their experience so dictates. Also, if prospective insureds anticipate that they may wish to convert term riders in the future, they should check the companies’ conversion charges, which may vary widely.Term riders normally provide that the policyowner can change the rider to a separate policy or convert it into a permanent form of coverage within a specified period or before a specified age without evidence of insurability. Companies differ with respect to the length of the period of coverage they will permit under the term rider. For instance, some companies limit both the coverage period and the conversion period to the insured’s age 65 or younger; others will permit coverage and conversion to later ages, such as age 75 or older.

2. Accelerated death benefit (ADB) rider
Accelerated death benefit riders, also called living benefit or advanced death benefit riders, are a relatively recent innovation with many variations. In general – for policies with this rider – insurers will pay part or all of the policy face amount of coverage in advance on the diagnosis of certain dread diseases or in the event of circumstances significantly affecting the insured’s longevity and quality of life, such as a major organ transplant or entering a nursing home.

In most cases, once insureds meet the conditions necessary to trigger accelerated payments, they can elect to receive benefits in a single lump sum or as a series of installment payments. However paid under the option, the amount of money insureds may receive generally is more than they would realize by surrendering the policy for cash or by taking a policy loan. Insureds usually do not have to use amounts they receive under the option to pay medical or nursing home expenses. Rather, they generally may use these amounts in any manner they desire.The amount that companies may pay in advance varies by company and circumstance. The percentage of the face amount of coverage that policies may pay out in advance ranges from 25 percent to 100 percent. In those policies with high percentage-of-face payouts, the limits may depend on the reason for payout. For example, policies may make about 70 percent to 85 percent of the death benefit available under the nursing home option and 90 percent to 98 percent under the terminal illness option. The insurers reduce the advanced death benefit amount by actuarial computation to reflect the earlier and determinable payout. Among the factors that affect the actual amount available are the face amount of death coverage, the insured’s actual future mortality, outstanding policy loans, current interest rates, future scheduled premiums, and administrative charges.

The policyowner may make the ADB election with respect to less than the total available insurance, provided the minimum election is for at least a specified amount, typically $25,000, and at least a specified amount of death benefit, such as $25,000, remains in force. When policyowners elect to receive an advanced payment of only a portion of the total benefit, the insurer reduces the life policy proportionately as to death benefit, premium, and value.

3. Disability waiver of premium rider
The waiver-of-premium rider is a form of disability insurance that provides that the basic policy (and often other riders) will continue in force if the insured becomes disabled and incapable of paying premiums. However, if policyowners have taken loans against their policy cash values, interest is still due on the loans. If interest on the policy loans is drawn from policy cash values (rather than paid in cash by the policyowner) and loan balances and interest charges are large relative to the net cash value, the policy could still lapse if the interest charges deplete the net cash value to close to zero.

Waiver of premium riders differ among companies and polices with respect to the period of coverage, the waiting period needed to qualify, and the definition of total disability.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
Period of coverage

If the insured becomes disabled after age 60, about half the companies’ provisions provide no waiver of premium benefit. Of those companies that do provide a waiver of premium benefit for disabilities occurring after age 60, most will waive premiums only to age 65, although some specify a period equal to the longer of a specified minimum number of years or to age 65 or 70. For example, the rider may specify that if disability occurs after age 60, premiums will be waived for two years or until the insured is age 65, whichever is longer.In the event of disability, the insurer essentially pays the premiums for the policyowner/insured for a specified period of time that varies from company to company. If disability occurs before age 60, most companies will waive premiums for as long as the disability continues or until the policy would otherwise terminate or endow. Some policies become paid up at age 65. If the waiver of premium rider is in effect at the time a policy becomes paid up, the insurer would not require the insured to resume premium payments even if he should overcome his disability.

Waiting period

Most companies use a waiting period of six months before insureds qualify for disability waiver of premium benefits. However, some companies use a shorter period of four months or less.

Definition of total disability

The definition of total disability varies widely and may be more or less liberal. It is therefore critical when shopping for a policy to determine which definition insurers are using in the policies one is considering.

A majority of the insurers use what advisers generally consider the most liberal definition:

Inability to perform one’s own job for two years, then any job for which reasonably suited by education, training, and experience.

A sizable minority of insurers use a somewhat less liberal definition:

Inability to perform any job for which reasonably suited by education, training, and experience.

A few insurers use a very limiting definition of total disability:

Inability to perform any job for pay or profit.

Many insurers use a duration-varying definition of disability where, for instance, they will use the most liberal “own job” definition for the first 2 to 5 years of disability and then switch to the somewhat less liberal “job for which reasonably suited” definition. Some insurers may even switch again at a later date to the “inability to perform any job” standard. Given the many possibilities or combinations of disability definitions and time frames when the insurers use the various definitions, persons seeking to buy insurance with a waiver of premium rider should review the specifics of the rider carefully.

Most insurers’ definitions also include conditions that are presumptive of total disability. Typically insurers presume the “loss of use of” or less liberally, the “loss of” two body members such as an arm and a leg, or of sight, to constitute total disability qualifying for waiver of premium. Some companies even include total loss of hearing as a presumptive condition. A minority of insurers include no presumptive conditions in their definition of total disability.
4. Long-term care rider (LTC)
Some life insurance issuers offer life insurance with a long-term care rider available for an additional charge. Essentially, an LTC rider is a variation of the accelerated death benefits rider. Persons who buy a policy with this rider can pay the premium in a single lump sum or by making periodic payments. In any case, the policies with the LTC rider provide policyowners with a death benefit that they can also use to pay for long-term care related expenses, should they incur them.

The insurer bases the amount of death benefit and the long-term care allowance on the insured’s age, gender, and health at the time the policyowner buys the policy. The appeal of this combination policy lies in the fact that either policyowners will use the policy to pay for long-term care expenses or their beneficiaries will receive the insurance proceeds at the insureds’ death. In either case, someone will benefit from the premiums policyowners pay.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
Accelerated benefits rider – An accelerated benefits rider makes it possible for policyowners to access the death benefit to pay for expenses related to long-term care. The insurer reduces the death benefit by the amount used for long-term care expenses, plus a service charge. If policyowners need long-term care for a lengthy period of time, they will eventually deplete their death benefit. Policyowners also can use this same rider if they have a terminal illness that may require payment of large medical bills. Because (as described above under the accelerated death benefits rider) accelerating the death benefit can have unfavorable tax consequences, one generally should not exercise this option before consulting a tax professional.Insurers add the long-term care benefit to the life insurance policy by either an accelerated benefits rider or an extension of benefits rider.

Example: Policyowner pays a single premium of $50,000 for a universal life insurance policy with a long-term care accelerated benefits rider. The policy immediately provides approximately $87,000 in long-term care benefits or $87,000 as a death benefit. If the insured incurs long-term care expenses, the accelerated benefits rider allows the insured to access a portion, such as 3 percent ($2,610), of the death benefit amount ($87,000) each month to reimburse some or all of the long-term care expenses. The insurer will continue payments until total payments exhaust the total death benefit amount of $87,000 in about 33.3 months. Whatever the policyowner does not use for long-term care will be left to heirs as a death benefit. (The hypothetical example is for illustration purposes only and does not reflect actual insurance products or performance. Guarantees are subject to the claims-paying ability of the issuer.)

Typically, qualifying for payments under a long-term care rider is similar to the qualifying for payments under most stand-alone long-term care policies. Insureds must be unable to perform usually 2 or 3 of the activities of daily living (bathing, dressing, eating, getting in or out of a bed or chair, toilet use, or maintaining continence) or suffer from a severe cognitive impairment.

An elimination period may also apply: policyowners pay for the initial cost of long-term care out-of-pocket for a specific number of days (usually 30 to 90, but sometimes longer) before they can apply for payments under the policy. As with all life and long-term care insurance, the insurance company will require prospective insureds to answer some health-related questions and to submit to a physical examination before they issue a combination policy.

Deciding whether a combination policy is the right choice depends on a number of factors.

First, a combination policy is almost never a good choice if the prospective insured does not need both life insurance and long-term care coverage.

Second, one should ask how much life and long-term care one needs and whether no one combination policy can adequately satisfy these needs. A long-term care rider may not provide as many features as a stand-alone long-term care policy. For example, the combination policy may not cover assisted living or home health aides. It also may not provide an inflation adjustment, an important feature considering the rising cost of long-term care. Given the greater flexibility of tailoring two distinct policies to meet the needs and also the inherently greater range of choices and flexibility with stand-alone long-term care policies, more often than not, a two-policy approach will better fit one’s needs.

Third, when it comes to long-term care, nobody can ever be sure how long he or she might need long-term care coverage. The critical question is: will the long-term care part of a combination policy provide sufficient coverage even if one adds an EOB rider?

Fourth, keep in mind that accelerated death benefits that the insurer pays for whatever reason deplete the face amount of the life insurance. The combination policy may be a risky proposition if one wants to maintain the level of the death benefit payable to heirs with a reasonably high probability.

Finally, the tax benefits offered by a qualified long-term care policy may not apply to the long-term care portion of combination policies, which could result in taxation of long-term care benefits received from the policy.
5. Accidental death benefit rider (ADB)
Many insurers offer an accidental death, or double indemnity, rider that – for a small additional premium – provides some multiple of the base face amount (typically double) if death is accidental. Most experts feel there is little use for this coverage, because the insurance need is rarely tied to the means of death. In fact, a nonaccidental death rider, if it were available, would be a better option, because death benefit needs are likely to be higher if death occurs after a prolonged and expensive illness than if it occurs suddenly as a result of an accident.

If policyowners purchase such a rider, they must take care to determine what the policy means by using the term “accidental” death. Insurers use two different clauses: the “accidental means” and the “accidental death” type clauses. Most companies now use the accidental death clause which provides that when death occurs as a result of accidental bodily injury, the insurer pays the accidental death benefit.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
Whatever merit an ADB rider may have, it is virtually useless if the insurer uses the accidental means clause to determine when they will pay the ADB. A person probably would be better off taking a chance spending the additional premium amount on the lottery.If the contract uses the accidental means clause, both cause and result must have been accidental. The insurer will not pay the ADB if death is accidental but did not occur as a result of an accidental means or cause. For instance, if a person dies as a result of falling down his stairs, it is an accidental death, but it might not qualify for the ADB if the means were not also accidental (he intended to go down the stairs). Only if the fall resulted from an accidental means (he tripped on his child’s roller skate), would the insurer pay the ADB.

Companies differ with respect to the minimum and maximum ages of coverage under the ADB rider. Some companies do not specify either minimum or maximum ages. Those that do, set age 1 or 5 as the minimum age and most set age 70 as the maximum age, although some set earlier maximum ages, such as age 65 or 60. Companies also differ with respect to the period of time after an accident during which death must occur for the insured to be paid the ADB. Most companies limit the period of time to 90 days, but some set the period at 120 or 180 days or 1 year. A few companies allow payment as long as the rider is in force.

Finally, some companies offer a curious limited ADB rider that pays a multiple benefit if death occurs on a common carrier, such as an airline, bus, taxi, or train. Some contracts include school buses and private passenger automobiles and/or will pay the ADB if death occurs as a result of being struck while a pedestrian. Once again, unless one has a gambling nature and spends a lot of time on common carriers in high-risk areas, the policyowner would be better off using the premium dollars spent on such an ADB rider buying additional coverage that will pay off regardless of the cause or means of death.
6. Additional purchase option (guaranteed insurability rider)
Most commonly, insurers sell permanent policies with attached additional purchase options (APOs) or guaranteed insurability options (GIOs) on the lives of younger insureds. The APO gives the younger insureds who cannot afford the premiums for large face amounts the option to purchase additional insurance without evidence of insurability at specified times in the future or upon the occurrence of certain life events. The traditional pattern provides regular options every three years usually beginning with age 25 and ending at age 40. However, some companies start options earlier and/or may continue the options at regular or specified intervals to age 65.

Most companies also provide alternate purchase options and dates based on the occurrence of certain critical life events that would normally warrant additional life insurance coverage. Most companies allow exercise of the option in case of marriage or birth, with multiples for multiple births. Some companies also will allow exercise if and when the insured adopts a child. In most cases, the exercise of an alternate purchase option will preempt exercise of the next regularly-scheduled purchase option.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
A sizable minority of insurers automatically include a disability waiver of premium (or policy charges if a UL policy) in their new policies if the original policy included it . Many other insurers will include the disability waiver of premium (or policy charges), if requested. However, there is a great diversity in the conditions for the disability waiver of premium (or policy charges) benefit in new policies issued under an APO. The waiver may be automatic, but only if the original policy is whole life or premiums are payable to an advanced age, such as age 95. In other cases, the insurer will include the waiver if the policyowner requests it but then only if the premium on the new policy is equal to or less than that of the whole life policy. In some cases, the disability waiver of premium (or policy charges) benefit is available only if the insured is not already totally disabled at the time the insurer issues the new policy. In other cases the insurer will include the waiver if the policyowner requests it and the company consents.The option amounts generally are scheduled on the specifications page of the contract and usually are equal to or less than the original face amount of coverage. In some cases, companies also specify a minimum purchase amount, such as $5,000 or $10,000.

In virtually all cases, insurers require the new policy to be a type of whole life or endowment policy. However, a few companies permit the insured to purchase term insurance.

In addition to the traditional APO for young insureds, some companies now offer special APOs or GIOs in other circumstances. For example, some companies offer a GIO for the survivor to a joint life contract. Also, some companies offer GIOs or APOs with policies issued to fund business buy/sell agreements. This permits the policyowners to increase necessary coverage as business values increase.
7. Disability income rider (DIR)
The disability income rider provides both a waiver of premium (or a waiver of policy charges) and a supplementary income if the insured becomes totally disabled. The definition of total disability is the same as that used for purposes of the waiver-of-premium or waiver of policy charges riders. Customarily, the policies express the disability income benefit as a specified percentage of the face amount payable monthly. The common percentage is 1 percent. For example, if the face amount of the policy is $50,000, the DIR will pay $500 per month in the event the insured becomes totally disabled.

As with regular disability income insurance policies, insurers generally place maximum limits on the amount of disability income they will issue to some stated figure, such as $1,000 per month. Also, through coordination of benefits provisions, they may further limit the amount of disability income they will issue and pay based on the total amount of income payable on all other disability income policies on the insured. As a general rule, insurers are reluctant to issue disability income policies when aggregate disability income payments may exceed 65 percent to 80 percent of the insured’s net earned income.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
The additional premium companies charge for a given disability income benefit varies among companies, but generally will be higher for policies issued by the companies that use the most liberal definition of total disability (as described above for the waiver of premium) and lower for those that use the most restrictive definition. Regardless of the definition used, the DIR generally will only pay if the insured is totally disabled and the disability is presumed to be permanent. Therefore, advisers generally do not consider the DIR to be the most suitable form of disability income insurance. For insureds who need disability income protection, insurers generally will tailor comprehensive disability income policies (independent of their life insurance policies) to fit their needs better and more cost effectively.Commonly, disability must continue for a 6-month waiting or elimination period before benefit payments commence, although a few companies use a 4-month waiting period. As with the waiver of premium or waiver of policy charges riders, if the insured overcomes the disability, disability income payments cease and the insured must commence paying premiums on the life insurance policy once again. However, in those cases where the disability ceases after age 65 and when the waiver of premium or policy charges provision pays-up the policy at age 65, insurers require no further premium payments.

8. Cost of living rider (COL)
Some companies guarantee the term rates for the COL additions, while others do not.The COL rider typically is a term insurance rider providing automatically increasing coverage each year, or every few years, equal to the increase in the cost of living as measured, normally, by the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The insurer bills policyowners for the additional coverage with the regular notice for the base policy. The insurers require no evidence of insurability; however, if policyowners reject the additional coverage at any time by nonpayment of the additional premium, they usually will have to provide evidence of insurability in order to receive future COL adjustments. Once the insurer increases coverage, the new level of coverage remains in effect, even if the owner later rejects increases or the CPI declines.

In the case of adjustable life products, the COL increases typically are part of the readjusted base policy, rather than term additions, and insurers adjust the premiums accordingly. In universal life policies, insurers may increase the face amount of coverage for COL adjustments without the need for the policyowner to pay additional premiums if the policy has sufficient cash value to support the higher death benefit at the current premium level.
9. Extension of benefits rider (EOB)
Policyowners can add extension of benefits riders to their policies with accelerated death benefit (ADB) riders to increase their coverage beyond their policies’ death benefits under the various forms of the ADB riders including benefits covering terminal, chronic, or critical illnesses and long-term care expenses. This rider differs from company to company as to its specific application.

Continuing from the example above under the long-term care rider section, if a policy’s extension of benefits rider increases the long-term care benefit (the death benefit–$87,000–remains the same) to three times the death benefit ($261,000), the monthly amount available for long-term care increases to $7,830. On the other hand, if the extension of benefits rider extends the length of time the monthly long-term care benefit is available, then the monthly payments ($2,610) are extended for an additional 24 to 36 months beyond the initial number of months (33.3) available.Depending on the issuer, the extension of benefits rider either increases the total benefit amount available for terminal, chronic, or critical illnesses or for long-term care expenses (while the death benefit remains the same) or lengthens the number of months over which the insurer will pay benefits. In either case, benefit payments will reduce the available death benefit of the policy. However, some companies still pay a minimum death benefit even if the total of all accelerated benefit payments exceeds the policy’s death benefit amount.

This LifeHealthPro story is excerpted from:

Related Article Image
READ NOW
 
10. Change of plan provision
Many policies provide a change of plan provision that gives the policyowner the privilege of exchanging the policy for some other contract issued by the company. In essence, this feature is an in house IRC Section 1035 exchange provision. In term contracts this generally is the conversion option that allows the policyowner to exchange a term contract for some form of permanent cash-value contract. In permanent cash value contracts, the privilege normally is to change to some other form of cash-value contract. In general, the insurer permits the exchange without evidence of insurability if the new plan is a higher-premium, higher cash value type of policy. Also, the new policy generally must have the same policy date and the same underwriting class and issue age as the original policy.

Policy exchange fees also vary widely. In some contracts, the insurers treat the new policy as a new issue with new issue charges and commissions. In other cases, the insurers issue the new policy at net cost, that is, without new issue fees and commissions. These companies levy only a minimal charge to cover the administrative and clerical costs of handling the paperwork.Despite these commonalities, the companies’ change of plan provisions operate in diverse ways. In some contracts, the insurers allow certain types of exchanges only with the approval of the company. In a few other companies’ contracts, policyowners may exchange virtually any type of policy for any other type, including permanent for term, with evidence of insurability but otherwise without the need for approval by the company. In many contracts, the change of plan clause states that the new policy may not have any riders attached, even if the old policy included certain riders, unless the company agrees. Although in most cases companies permit existing riders to continue in the new policy, some companies’ change of plan clauses specifically state that riders may continue in the new policy without the need for special approval by the company.
Riders in insurance policies
Riders are an important and integral part of insurance policies. A policy rider in an insurance policy represents a provision or modification to an existing insurance policy that provides additional coverage to an insurance policy. Riders on the insurance contract provide additional protection against risk.

Normally, a term life policy lapses when one stops paying premiums. A waiver of premium rider is a rider that lets one stop paying premiums for a policy if you become disabled for a sustained period of time before reaching age 60. The rider keeps your policy active by paying premiums for the insured. Riders if selected properly based on ones insurance needs can add great value to the life cover of the insured.


For example, a person who already has an existing accidental insurance policy for Rs 30 lacs and has no liability may not need to include the accidental death benefit with his policy.

However, if he is inadequately covered for life insurance and is financially incapable of taking a larger cover, then he may opt for the accidental death benefit because the accidental death benefit rider will cost much less than the additional cover required and will provide additional monetary protection to his survivors in case of his unfortunate accidental death.

Policy riders are sold separately from insurance policies. One can buy a basic insurance policy and add riders to the policy to include extra protection. The additional risks covered may include premium waiver in case of death, additional accidental death cover, disability cover, critical illness cover, hospitalisation benefits, loss of employment cover, accelerated death benefit etc.

A double indemnity rider pays twice the amount of the policy if one dies accidentally. One need to choose the riders that are suited to ones specific needs. The policyholders should avoid those riders to the policy, which are least useful to them and include those that may be critically important to their needs.

The riders provide low cost pure risk cover to the insured. These need to be bought specifically along with the base policy at the time of inception of the policy. The insured cannot keep adding riders through the tenure of the policy. The premium on the riders is lower than the same cover bought as a specific policy. This is because of the reason that the insurance company's administration costs are lower.

One is required to pay additional premium for additional riders. These additional charges are normally lower than the individual policies that provide the same benefits. In case the event that has been insured against through the coverage occurs, the insured or his beneficiaries would be paid the rider benefits. One should evaluate whether a policy rider offers additional protection that is worth the extra expense. Insurers have in-built riders attached to their basic policy.

Some have flexible-plans, which can be designed to suit customer needs. These riders add to the cost of the policyholder, but assure him of an additional sumassured in case of certain eventualities covered by the rider. In case of flexi-plans, the customer has an option to attach the desired riders to the basic policy, which could be either endowment, money-back, whole life or term policy. These customized plans are much better than the ready-made plans with the in-built riders.

The need of a rider with a life insurance policy depends on the insuranceseeker's existing insurance, as well as additional medical and non-life covers available with him. Also it depends on his financial condition, his savings component and his liabilities.

Insurance Riders: When to Say Yes to Extra Protection
When you really want to be sure that your metaphorical pants won't fall down, sometimes you take the belt and suspenders approach: The usual safety feature, plus a backup.

In the realm of insurance, that backup is called a rider. It goes beyond your standard policy and protects against those issues that concern you enough that you're willing to shell out extra money to protect yourself against then.

In most cases, people are better off paying for the things covered by riders out of pocket, says Eli Lehrer, vice president of The Heartland Institute, a conservative, free-market think tank.
"Typically, riders are expensive, and the insurance companies are the big winners," concurs Pete D'Arruda, president of Capital Financial Advisory Group.

That said, sometimes stuff happens, and you can't put a price tag on peace of mind. (Except when you can -- it's called your insurance premium.) Here's a look at a few common riders that might be worthwhile for you, as well as some that may not be worth your money.

Life Insurance

Guaranteed insurability: A guaranteed insurability rider gives you the right to buy additional life insurance at certain future dates, without having to provide any medical updates. For example, the rider might permit you to purchase additional insurance at ages 30, 35, and 40. However, with many insurance companies, this rider only assures you the right to buy additional coverage until you reach a certain age, usually 40.

You'll pay roughly an additional 10% to 15% of your premium for this rider, says Brian Ashe, treasurer of the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education. The premium for any additional insurance purchased under the rider would be based on your age at the time you buy it.

"This rider can be particularly useful if you are in a high-risk group for any disease that might make you you uninsurable," says Michael DeGroat, a financial adviser with Ameriprise Financial Services.

Long-term care: Long-term care insurance can be pricey, so some people find a long-term care rider easier on the budget. The rider allows you to use your death benefit to pay for long-term care expenses you may incur. Some riders allow the long-term care benefit to exceed your policy's death benefit by two to three times, or extend the number of months over which you can receive long-term care benefit payments such that the total payments available are greater than the death benefit, says DeGroat.
Know however, that long-term care payments will reduce the death benefit on a dollar-for-dollar basis.

There are a number of variations on this theme. The Hartford has a LifeAccess rider on permanent life insurance that allows you to draw down on the life insurance benefit to pay for a chronic illness. The plus of this product, says spokesperson Robert DeMallie, is flexibility: "You are not limited on what you can spend the money on. You could use the money to pay your daughter for taking care of you, take a trip, or make home improvements."

The Hartford also offers a Longevity Access rider that allows people who live to 90 to draw down on the money that would otherwise be paid to their beneficiaries. 

"With so many people living to 90 and beyond, being able to have this income is a game changer," says Robert Pokorski, chief medical strategist for The Hartford. With the Longevity Access rider you can withdraw up to 1% each month of the total that would be paid at the policyholder's death. Both of these riders will cost about 5% to 15% of the primary policy's premium.

Waiver of premium: With this rider, the insurance company pays your policy's premiums should you ever become totally disabled. 

"The definition of total and permanent disability varies from one insurance company to the next, so it's important to understand how your insurer defines this term," cautions DeGroat. And, you may have to wait three to six months after the injury or illness before the insurer will certify that your disability is permanent, during which time you must continue to pay your own premiums. Once the waiting period expires, if you are still disabled, you will be considered permanently disabled. Premiums paid during the waiting period will be refunded and the insurance company will begin making your premium payments.

The cost of this rider varies mainly based on your age when you buy it. The older the individual, the more expensive it can become, adding to as much as 15% to 20% to the cost of the premium.
Homeowners Insurance

Personal property: For expensive items like jewelry and artwork, you'll want a personal property rider. With a standard homeowners policy, where limits for jewelry can be $1,500, you may need much more in the case of theft or damage. You'll need to provide an appraisal of the items to show proof of value. The cost of the rider will depend on the amount insured, says Amy Danise, senior managing editor at Insure.com.

Sewage backup: Every other day, it seems like there's news of flooding somewhere in America. While flood insurance is typically covered under a separate policy, sewage backup is not. Such a rider would cover damage from a sewer backup or a sump pump that couldn't keep up with the water flow into a basement. It would also cover backups due to tree roots blocking a sewer line. The cost for such coverage: Just $40 to $50 a year, according Tully Lehman, communications specialist with the Insurance Information Network of California.

Building code upgrades: If your home is damaged or destroyed, it must be rebuilt to current codes. "You might have to pay more out-of-pocket if it's illegal to rebuild your house to the old code," says Lehrer. The added cost for that likely isn't covered under your policy, so you might want to consider "ordinance" or "law" riders. This will provide up to a specified amount of extra money to account for building code upgrades.

Replacement cost (contents): In the event of a loss, there's no depreciation taken into account for the personal property you must replace. 

Guaranteed replacement cost : With this coverage, the insurance company will replace your home with another of like kind and quality, even if the replacement cost is above the value listed on your policy. "Some carriers still put a limit of 20% or 25% above the listed value," says Robert Ryan, president of Ryan & Ryan Insurance Brokers.

A Freebie You'd Probably Rather Not Use 

Some things in life -- and life insurance -- are premium free. The accelerated death benefit rider allows the policy owner to receive an advance on the death benefit if the insured has a terminal illness that is expected to result in death within 12 months. The proceeds may be used for any purpose. Though there is no additional premium for this rider, a fee is charged when it's exercised, says Raleigh Lang, a MassMutual adviser.

Riders You Don't Need

While there are some good policy items to add on, others you might politely pass on. 

"Critical illness riders generally have lots of caveats and do not cover a full range of risks," points out Cora Klena, a spokesperson for USAA.

Another extra that some experts aren't too keen on is the business pursuits rider. 

"I think it's a waste of money. The better way to protect a home business -- to protect both property and liability for business -- is to purchase a separate commercial insurance policy," says Dan Weedin of Toro Consulting. "The business pursuits rider is limited and may not cover what is needed because it might be too generic in nature or not tailored for unusual businesses. For instance, a consultant like me needs professional liability, and even a business pursuits rider will not protect me for that."

Lehrer is emphatic about return-of-premium riders on term insurance. "They are always bad deals," he says. If you -- the insured -- die within a certain time after purchasing the policy, the insurance company will pay an amount equal to the total premiums paid, in addition to the face amount of the policy. You'll pay extra to assume that you'll outlive the term of your policy and get all your money back. Would you be better shunning the rider and instead investing that money in another way? That's a question only you can answer. How worried are you about those pants?
Riders are the additional benefits that you may buy and add to your policy at a nominal cost. They allow you to enhance your insurance cover, qualitatively and quantitatively.
 
To offer you comprehensive protection, we offer a set of Riders that you can add to your Birla Sun Life Insurance Solution and customise it based on your preferences at a nominal cost.
The 9 Most Useful Life Insurance Riders
You've figured out how much life insurance you need, how many years you need it, how much you can spend and what type of policy best fits your situation.

But your homework isn't finished yet. Now an array of life insurance policy add-ons, called riders, must be considered.

"Riders can give policyholders additional benefits and increase peace of mind that if something goes wrong, there's a Plan B," says Shelley Fiore, an agent for Detroit Financial Group, a general agency of the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co.

When you buy life insurance, available riders vary by insurance company and policy, as do the rules for how they work. Costs also vary and depend on many factors, including your age, health and type of policy. We can't list every option available, but here are some of the most useful riders.

In case you become totally disabled
1. Waiver of premium rider
With this rider, you don't have to pay the premium if you become totally disabled and can't work.

Fiore says she always suggests that clients consider it so "they don't have to choose whether to put food on the table or pay the insurance premium."

Keep in mind the waiver expires, often at age 60 or 65.

2. Disability income rider
You collect a regular income from the insurance company if you become totally disabled and can't work. The policy specifies the amount of the income and whether it's paid for a certain amount of time or for the length of the disability.

Some disability income riders pay out only if you became disabled from an accident, while others pay on accident or sickness, says Al Lurty, senior vice president of ING's U.S. insurance operations.

In case you need more insurance but your health has declined
3. Guaranteed insurability rider
This rider lets you purchase additional life insurance coverage at a later date without undergoing a medical exam or providing any evidence about your insurability.

Because you never know how your health could change, Fiore says it make sense to consider the rider (if you're eligible) and think you might want to buy more life insurance later. The option allows you to buy additional insurance at certain intervals, such as every three years, or at certain ages, Fiore says. When the option comes up to buy more coverage, the insurance company considers your age for setting the premium, but not your health.

"I've seen people with severe heart conditions or cancer get additional coverage who otherwise would have been declined," Fiore says.

In case you want to convert term life to permanent insurance
4. Term conversion rider
Term life provides coverage for a certain period of time, such as 10, 15, or 20 years. Permanent life insurance, such as whole life or universal life, provides coverage for your entire life, so your beneficiary receives a benefit no matter when you die.

This rider lets you convert term life insurance into permanent life insurance without undergoing a medical exam. Fiore says it's especially attractive to young people starting careers and families who need life insurance but don't have enough money yet to secure all the coverage with permanent life insurance, which has higher premiums than term life.

There will be a deadline for when you must convert, if you want to change the term policy to permanent life insurance without providing health information. Understand the convertibility features of term life before you buy.

In case you become seriously ill
5. Accelerated death benefit rider
This has become standard in the insurance industry, Lurty says, and is usually included automatically for free or offered at nominal cost. The rider lets you collect a portion of the policy's death benefit if you become terminally ill with a short life expectancy, such as one year. The policy spells out how much of the death benefit is available before death. Usually it's capped at $250,000 to $500,000, Lurty says.

You can use the proceeds for anything, such as paying medical bills or living expenses. Even though the insurer offers the rider free, the company may charge a fee if it is exercised.

6. Critical illness rider
The insurer pays a lump sum if you're diagnosed with one of the critical illnesses specified in the insurance policy, such as cancer, heart attack, stroke, kidney failure and others. Instead of reimbursing you for medical expenses, the way health insurance does, the rider provides money to use for any purpose during the course of treatment.

In case the unthinkable happens
7. Child protection rider
No one wants to consider the possibility of losing a child, so all emotion must be set aside when considering a child protection rider. Although the death of a child typically would not result in income loss, as would the death of a spouse, the tragedy still would have some financial consequences, which could be an additional hardship for a bereaved family. This term life insurance rider provides coverage for final expenses in case the unthinkable happens. The coverage generally can be purchased in units - for example, $1,000 -- Lurty says, at a nominal price. Basic information about the child's health is required for underwriting.

In case you die from an accident
8. Accidental death benefit rider
If you die from an accident, this rider provides an additional benefit on top of the policy's regular death benefit. The option is often referred to as double indemnity when the additional payout equals the original death benefit. Sometimes the rider also includes additional payment for dismemberment. You would collect money if you lost a limb or your sight. Life insurers will consider your occupation and hobbies when determining premiums, Lurty says. High-risk activities, like race-car driving, would boost the rates.

In case you outlive your term life policy
9. Return of premium rider
"If you live to the end of the term, in exchange for paying the premium, in most circumstances you get all your money back," Lurty says. He notes that some companies use a separate rider where others, like ING, write the return of premium benefit into a base policy.

You pay a higher premium for the opportunity to get your money back. The big question to consider: How does paying the extra cost for the return of premium rider compare to investing that money and buying a basic term policy instead?

To find the answer, subtract the annual premium for a basic term policy from the annual cost of a return of premium policy. The difference is how much you would have to invest each year during the insurance term. Then calculate what annual rate of return you'd need on that money to beat the amount you'd get back from a return-of-premium policy. Remember, money from the return of premiums is tax-free, but your own investment returns are taxed. In some cases (depending on age, sex, tax bracket and other factors), you'd need to get more than a 7% rate of return on your investment to beat the return of premium policy, Lurty says.

There is no one-size-fits-all answer to whether any of these riders are right for you. You'll need to weigh policy options to find the best package for your needs.

"My best advice is to talk to a knowledgeable life insurance agent to help make an informed decision," Lurty says.

The original article can be found at Insure.com:
The 9 most useful life insurance riders
Quality of Life...Insurance Products
At American General our Quality of Life...Insurance® suite of products is Changing The Way Americans Think About, Purchase and Use Life Insurance.®

What if you suffer a major heart attack, stroke, or invasive cancer and don’t die? Would your family be able to maintain their standard of living if you were financially impacted by a serious illness?

Traditional life insurance is designed to provide security for your loved ones in the event of your premature death… but what if you could get life insurance you don’t have to die to use? 

QoL Products

QoL Guarantee Plus
Lifestyle Income Solution
QoL Index Plus
QoL Index Plus II
QoL Accumulator
QoL Performer Plus
QoL Performer/Provider
QoL Advantage
QoL Income Protection Plus
QoL Flex Term
Important Consumer Disclosures Regarding Accelerated Benefit Riders
Disclosures Applicable to the Accelerated Benefit Rider

(1) When filing a claim for Qualifying Critical Illness, Qualifying Terminal Illness or Qualifying Chronic Illness under an Accelerated Benefit Rider, the claimant must provide to the Company a completed claim form (with Certification attached in the case of a Qualifying Chronic Illness) which must be received at its Administrative Center within the time frame specified in the Rider, if any. 

(2) If a benefit under an Accelerated Benefit Rider is payable and the Owner elects to receive such benefit, the Company will provide the Owner with one (1) opportunity to elect a Flexible Accelerated Benefit and/or a Defined Accelerated Benefit, if applicable, under the Policy as to such Qualifying Event. Where such an election is made, the Owner must complete an election form and return it to AGL within 60 days of receipt of the election form.  The Company will not provide a later opportunity to elect a Flexible Accelerated Benefit and/or a Defined Accelerated Benefit, if applicable, under a Policy as to the same Qualifying Critical Illness or Qualifying Chronic Illness. Under certain circumstances where an insured’s mortality (i.e., our expectation of the insured’s life expectancy) is not significantly changed by a Qualifying Critical Illness or Qualifying Chronic Illness, the accelerated benefit may be zero.  

(3) Generally, we will send you an IRS Form 1099-LTC if you receive an accelerated death benefit on account of a Chronic Illness or a Terminal Illness.  We will send you an IRS Form 1099-R if you receive an accelerated death benefit on account of a Critical Illness. 
The sum that will be included in Box 2 (Accelerated death benefits paid) of IRS Form 1099-LTC or in Box 1 (Gross distribution) of IRS Form 1099-R will be the actual sum you received by check or otherwise minus any refund of premium and/or loan interest included with our benefit payment plus any unpaid but due policy premium, if applicable, and/or pro rata amount of any loan balance.  

Disclosures Applicable to the Critical Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider and Terminal Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider  

(1) When filing a claim for Critical Illness under a Critical Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider or a Terminal Illness under a Terminal Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider, the claimant must provide to the Company a completed claim form which must be received at its Administrative Center within the time frame specified in the Rider, if any. 
  
(2) If a benefit under the Critical Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider is payable and the Owner elects to receive such benefit, the Owner must complete an election form and return it to the Company within 60 days of receipt of the election form. The Company will not provide a later opportunity to elect an Accelerated Benefit under a Policy as to the same Critical Illness. Under certain circumstances where an insured’s mortality (i.e., our expectation of the insured’s life expectancy) is not significantly changed by a Critical Illness, the accelerated benefit may be zero.  

(3) Generally, we will send you an IRS Form 1099-LTC if you receive an accelerated death benefit on account of a Terminal Illness.  We will send you an IRS Form 1099-R if you receive an accelerated death benefit on account of a Critical Illness.   
The sum that will be included in Box 2 (Accelerated death benefits paid) of IRS Form 1099-LTC or in Box 1 (Gross distribution) of IRS Form 1099-R will be the actual sum you received by check or otherwise minus any refund of premium and/or loan interest included with our benefit payment plus any unpaid but due policy premium, if applicable, and/or pro rata amount of any loan balance.  

Disclosures Applicable to the Accelerated Benefit Rider, the Critical Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider and the Terminal Illness Accelerated Benefit Rider  

(1) The failure to provide a required claim form and a required election form (with the requested attachments) within the periods set forth for each in a Policy may preclude payment of a benefit.   

(2) Benefits payable under an accelerated benefit rider may be taxable.  Neither American General Life Insurance Company nor any agent representing it is authorized to give legal or tax advice. Please consult a qualified legal or tax advisor regarding questions concerning the information and concepts contained in this material.   

(3) See your policy for details. 


Additional Important Disclosures

Quality of Life…Insurance Policies are not available in the state of New York. Acceleration will reduce (or eliminate) the Insured Person’s base life insurance benefit and policy values, if any. Depending on the amount you accelerate, this means there will be less (or no) benefit paid when the Insured dies. 

Coverage under an accelerated benefit rider terminates on the date coverage under the policy or any covered riders terminates. We encourage you to read your policy and advise you to consider your options carefully before ever letting your policy lapse for any reason, including the non-payment of premium, especially while an ABR claim is pending. 

The insurance company may contest the policy from the date of policy issue, a reinstatement or an increase in coverage, during a period provided by applicable law and described in the policy, for the misstatement or misrepresentation of material fact on the application for such policy, reinstatement, or increase. 

If an insured person dies by suicide within the suicide period provided by applicable law and described in the policy, the death benefit will be limited as provided by the policy.
What Are Life Insurance Riders?
Life insurance riders are simply forms of additional or supplemental life insurance coverage with a variety of functions. You can purchase the rider as an add-on to your main policy. These riders provide you with extra coverage for specific situations.

One of the benefits of a life insurance rider is that you can add coverage for special challenges and sudden, expensive health events, like nursing care.
Do I Need a Life Insurance Rider?
Determining whether you need a life insurance rider will depend on your financial situation, your age, the state of your health, the needs of your dependents, and your desire to have coverage for a specific situation. Your need for a life insurance rider may also depend on how much life insurance protection exists in the policy you have, and what gaps in coverage remain.

What Are the Best Life Insurance Riders?
There are a variety of riders that provide additional coverage for different sorts of situations. The most commonly purchased riders include, but are not limited to, the following:

Accidental death benefit rider: This rider provides additional life insurance coverage if you die as a result of an accident. It generally pays twice the amount of your original life insurance coverage and is sometimes also known as “double indemnity.” Some of these riders also allow for an additional payment for dismemberment, or loss of a limb.
Long-term care rider: This rider is a specific amount of coverage for a specified period of time. Variations exist which may allow you or your beneficiaries to collect all or a portion of the long-term benefits should the premiums not be used. Others allow the purchaser to receive their unused premiums back, or return the premiums if the insured cancels coverage.
Waiver of premium rider: This rider will ensure that your life insurance premiums will continue to be paid if you become disabled and can no longer work, making it a hardship to continue the insurance premium payments.
Return of premium rider: The rider may be purchased separately or included in the primary life insurance policy. It applies to term life insurance policies and guarantees that all the money spent on the premiums will be refunded (without interest) at the expiration of the term or policy.
Disability income rider: If you become disabled, this rider will pay you a monthly income outlined in the policy.
Guaranteed insurability rider: This rider guarantees that you can renew a term policy when you reach the end of the term, regardless of the state of your health. Read the provisions carefully as there are specific conditions that vary from company to company.
Accelerated death benefit/critical illness rider: This rider allows you collect either a portion or all of your life insurance coverage if you are diagnosed with a terminal illness and require long term care in a facility or nursing home. The terms of this rider allow you to pay for medical expenses or any other form of additional expenses you incur as a result of your terminal illness.
Term conversion rider: If you have a term life insurance policy, this rider allows you to convert your term policy into a permanent insurance policy such as whole life or universal life insurance without having to take a medical exam. It is useful for younger people who can’t afford a permanent policy but want a policy that covers them for life. Convertibility features have specific requirements, so make sure you understand the policy stipulations.
Family income benefit rider: This rider allows your family/beneficiary to receive your death benefits in specified monthly installments or for a particular duration, rather than receiving death benefits as a lump-sum payment.
Child protection rider: This option provides nominal coverage should your child accidentally die, and can be used to pay for funeral or medical expenses depending on how much coverage you buy. The issuance of these policies may require a health profile on the child.
Cost of living rider: This rider allows you to automatically add more life insurance coverage to your existing policy based on the Consumer Price Index, which counters the inflation over the lifespan of your existing policy.
Funeral and burial insurance rider: Additional smaller policies can be purchased which will pre-pay or provide a specific death benefit amount to pay for the cost of your funeral.
Using Life Insurance Riders to Pay Off Debt
Life insurance riders can be used in a variety of ways to pay off your existing debts. If you are diagnosed with a terminal illness, for example, an accelerated death benefit rider allows you to collect some or all of your death benefits right away. You can then use those benefits to cover some or all your current existing debts.

A family income rider will allow your beneficiaries to manage debt payments on a monthly budget.

A disability income rider will provide a source of income should you become disabled, and it will allow you to continue to pay off your existing personal loans and credit cards.

An accidental death benefit rider can double the amount of your death benefits should you die accidentally. This extra income amount can also be used to pay off your mortgage and other existing debts.
Using Life Insurance Riders to Pay for College
College and university tuition is expensive, and it can take many years to pay off a student loan. Several of the life insurance riders described above can provide you or your beneficiaries with extra coverage so that the student loan can still be paid if you die unexpectedly, or if you become critically ill or disabled and can no longer earn an income.

Using Life Insurance to Pay for a Funeral
There are specific policies or riders designed to cover the cost of a funeral or pay for burial expenses. These riders or policies can be bought separately from your primary life insurance policy. They come in a variety of formats, such as preneed funeral insurance, final expense insurance and burial insurance. These policies will pre-pay directly to the funeral home or pay a lump-sum specified in the policy to your beneficiary.

Everyone has unique concerns and needs when it comes to life insurance. A primary policy such as a term or permanent policy may not meet all your needs. You can customize and strengthen your life insurance protection by purchasing riders to create the ideal insurance package that addresses all of your primary concerns.

Life insurance riders vary considerably from insurer to insurer. To find the most suitable rider for your insurance requirements, contact an independent agent in the Trusted Choice network. Your agent can help you compare policy rider options that can be tailor-made for your unique situation.

Contact an agent today to find the perfect life insurance riders that will protect you from the unexpected.
An Overview of Policy Obligations
Insurance policies are contracts. You and your insurer are contracting for specific things. Both parties to the contract will have rights and obligations under the contract.

Your Obligations

It is your obligation to:

Report All Claims-
Your business must report all claims including those things that may reasonably become claims. I know business owners that do not report a claim until a law suit occurs. This is a bad practice and will jeopardize your business insurance coverage. Never try and settle a claim without contacting the insurer. When in doubt - report.
Cooperate In Your Defense and the Investigation of the Claim-
Your business must cooperate with the insurer in its investigation and with any attorney appointed to defend your business. Many business owners take the “report and forget” approach. If you do not cooperate, then the insurer may deny defense and indemnity because you have breached the contract by failing to cooperate.

Provide Truthful Information-
In most states it is a felony to knowingly submit claim documents that are false. It is fraud and you will be caught – eventually. Some business owners are tempted to inflate the value of a loss to “make up for” the deductible. Never submit false claims and, in fact, have an independent party produce an appraisal of things that may be questioned by your insurer.
Your Insurer’s Obligations

It is the insurer’s obligation to:

Follow all Laws and Regulations in Your State –
The insurer must follow all of the regulations and laws of your state. This includes consumer laws.
Defend Your Business in Case of a Claim-
The insurer has a duty to defend your business if a claim is made that may invoke coverage. This duty is very broad. Even if the insurer believes the claim is not covered, the insurer will still have to defend your business subject to a “reservation of rights.” A reservation of rights is a letter that tells you the insurer will defend but reserves its right to deny payment on the claim because it is not covered.
Indemnify Your Business for Loss or Damage From a Covered Cause –
Your insurer must indemnify (pay) for any covered loss up to the limits of insurance stated on the policy.

These are the basic obligations of the insured and insurer across all fifty states.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE INSURED, PRIMARY INSURER AND EXCESS INSURERS IN LARGE LOSS CASES

In today’s litigation arena, where an increasing number of cases implicate multiple layers
of liability insurance coverage, whether because of catastrophic injuries, number of claimants or
lottery ticket jurisdictions, relationships between insureds, primary insurers and excess insurers
are being tested. The rights and obligations of insureds and their insurers, whether primary,
umbrella or excess, are founded first and foremost in contract, as set forth in the language of
insurance policies. Typically, however, there is no contractual relationship between primary and
excess insurers who provide coverage to a common insured. Consequently, the obligations
between primary and excess insurers have developed largely as a matter of caselaw and may
differ significantly from one jurisdiction to another.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a general review of the rights and obligations of
the insured, primary insurers and excess insurers in the defense and resolution of large loss
litigation. Any such analysis must begin with an understanding of the different mechanisms of
liability insurance and self-insurance that are available to insureds.
A. Components of a Multi-tiered Insurance Program
1. Primary Insurance
Primary liability insurance provides the first layer of insurance coverage that attaches
immediately upon the happening of an occurrence that is covered by the terms of the policy.
Under the typical primary liability
insurance policy, an insurer undertakes two separate and distinct obligations: to defend and to
indemnify the insured from liability for accidental bodily injury and property damage to third
parties subject to the exclusions and limitations set forth in the policy. Typically, under standard
form primary liability policies, the insurer has a duty to provide a defense for any claims
“potentially covered” by the policy and the right to control the defense of such claims. Mesmer
v. Maryland Automobile Ins. Fund, 353 Md. 241, 258, 725 A.2d 1053 (1999); Sherwood
Brands, Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Company, 374 Md. 32, 43, 698 A.2d 1078
(1997); St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Pryseski, 292 Md. 187, page 438 A.2d 282 (1981);
Brohawn v. Transamerica Ins. Co., 276 Md. 396, 408, 347 A.2d 842 (1975). In most
jurisdictions, courts have found that the primary insurer’s duty to defend the policyholder is
distinct from and broader than the duty to indemnify. It is triggered by allegations of fact that, if
true, would bring a claim within the coverage of the policy. Such allegations may give rise to the
insurer’s defense obligation even where ultimately there is no duty to indemnify.1
Because most losses are within primary policy limits and because primary insurers are
generally obligated to provide a defense to their insureds, “primary coverage is much more
expensive than excess coverage.” Americold Corp., 934 P.2d at 81(insured’s premium cost for $1 million primary coverage was $232,077, while cost for $25 million excess coverage was $121,500)
Self Insurance
Some businesses elect to “self insure” at the primary level up to certain limits of liability
or with respect to particular types of losses.2
 “Self insurance” can take various forms: true self
insurance where a corporation retains all risks against which it might otherwise insure; the
purchase of insurance with a self-insured retention or SIR;3
the purchase of fronting policies; or
the purchase of policies with retrospective premiums. Douglas R. Richmond, Issues and
Problems in “Other Insurance,” Multiple Insurance and Self-Insurance, 22 Pepp. L. Rev. 1373,
1447-48 (1995). In cases where an insured has a significant SIR, it may also retain the right and
obligation to adjust the claim, either directly or through a third-party administrator and to select
counsel to defend the case. Richmond, supra at 1449; see, also, Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v.
American Home Assur. Co., 348 F.Supp.2d 940, 943, 953, 961-62 (N.D. Ill. 2004) (railroad with
multi-tiered risk-management program, including $5 million self-insured primary level retained
duty to investigate and defend catastrophic accident that implicated excess layers). As a general
rule, a self-insured must satisfy or “exhaust” its SIR before excess coverage is triggered.
As distinguished from a primary insurer, a self-insured has a contractual relationship with
its excess carrier and, correspondingly, assumes contractual duties to its excess carrier under the terms and conditions of the excess insurance policy. A self-insured also assumes duties of good
faith and fair dealing in handling the defense and settlement of a claim so as not to elevate its financial interests over that of its excess insurer. See Harbor Ins. Co. v. City of Ontario, 231 Cal.
App. 3d 927, 282 Cal. Rptr. 701 (4th Dist. 1991).
3. Excess Insurance
When the size, operations or circumstances of the insured require higher limits of
insurance, the insured typically procures umbrella and/or excess coverage. Excess liability
insurance “covers occurrences covered by the primary policy but exceeding the liability limits of
the primary policy.” Mayor & City Council, 145 Md. App. at 308, 802 A.2d at 1101, n.50
(quoting Megonnel v. United States Automobile Ass’n, 368 Md. 633, 644, 796 A.2d 758, 765
n.6 (2002)). In general, companies purchase excess coverage to protect themselves from
catastrophic loss. Id. (citations omitted). An excess policy will respond only after a predetermined
amount of underlying coverage is exhausted and it does not broaden the scope of
coverage provided by the underlying policy. See generally, Douglas R. Richmond, Rights and
Responsibilities of Excess Insurers, 78 Denv. U. L. Rev. 29, 30 (citing Wells Fargo Bank v. Cal.
Ins. Guar. Ass’n., 45 Cal. Rptr.2d 537, 539 n.2 (Ct. App. 1995); Globe Indem. Co. v. Jordan, 634
A.2d 1279, 1283 (N.E. 1993)). The insuring agreement of excess policies typically contain
provisions such as: The company will indemnify the insured for Ultimate Net Loss in excess
of the applicable Underlying Limit which the Insured shall become legally
obligated to pay as damages because of Personal Injury, Property Damage or
Advertising Injury to which this policy applies, caused by an occurrence
anywhere in the world….
Excess insurance policies may “follow form” to the underlying coverage, incorporating by
reference its terms, conditions, and exclusions or it may be written on its own insuring
agreement.4
 As distinguished from primary coverage, there is no duty to defend under an excess policy unless and until the stated limits of underlying insurance are exhausted. Under most
excess policies, however, the excess insurer has the right to participate, at its own expense, in the
investigation, settlement or defense of any claim or suit that it believes may implicate its coverage.
Because excess insurers are not typically obligated to provide a defense, excess premiums are less than premiums charged for primary policies. The concept of excess policies is to provide inexpensive coverage for unusual catastrophic losses above limits of conventional primary coverage. Mayor & City Council, supra (citing Fried v. North River Ins. Co., 710 F.2d
1022, 1026 (4th Cir. 1983).
4. Umbrella Insurance
Like excess insurance, an umbrella policy provides limits of insurance that are in addition to those available under a primary policy. Unlike an excess policy, an umbrella policy may also provide broader coverage than the underlying primary policy. Umbrella policy forms commonly contain a complete set of declarations, terms, conditions, definitions and endorsements. Theinsuring agreement of an umbrella policy will frequently state that it provides for coverage of damages caused by an occurrence, as defined within the coverage terms of the policy, and also for an occurrence which “is not within the terms of coverage of underlying insurance, but is within the terms of coverage of this insurance.” To this extent, an umbrella policy may function as a “gap filler” that provides a defense and first dollar liability coverage for claims that are not
within the coverage provided by a primary policy. 
Duties of the Insured and Primary Insurer to Excess Insurer
As noted above, there is no contractual relationship between a primary insurer and an
excess insurer that gives rise to contractual obligations between the two. Instead, the insurance
contracts, whether excess or primary, create obligations only between the insured and the
respective insurer. Under the insurance contract, an insurer typically does not assume any duties
to another insurer, including those that provide coverage at a different layer for a common
insured. Notwithstanding the absence of contractual obligations, some courts have imposed noncontractual
duties on primary insurers in their dealings with excess insurers in the context of
claims that are likely to exceed primary limits.
1. Duties with Respect to Settlement
It is well-established in the majority of jurisdictions that a primary insurer owes a duty of
good faith and fair dealing to its insured that arises from the insurer’s exclusive right to control
the defense and settlement of claims within the coverage of its policy. In the context of
settlement negotiations, courts have held that, in light of this right of control, an insurer may not
place its pecuniary interests ahead of its insured in the settlement process. Under most state’s
law, an insurer may be liable to its insured for any amount in excess of policy limits if that
excess verdict is caused by the primary insurer’s unreasonable failure to settle within policy limits when it could have done so. See, e.g., State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins. Co. v. White,
233 Md. 324, 236 A.2d 269 (1967). In some jurisdictions this liability is found to arise from an
independent tort duty. State Farm, supra; Anderson v. Continental Ins. Co., 85. Wis.675, 271
N.W. 2d 368, 374 (1978). The majority of states, however, do not recognize a cause of action in
tort for an insurer’s failure to honor its obligations. Instead these jurisdictions find that liability
lies, if at all, in breach of the contractual duty of good faith and fair dealing, see, e.g., State Farm Fire & Cas. Co v. Nicholson, 777 P.2d 1152, 1155 (Alaska 1989), or in violation of state
statutory unfair insurance practices acts. See e.g., American Nat’l Red Cross v. Travelers Indem.
Co., 896 F. Supp. 8, 12 (D.D.C. 1995).
Whether sounding in tort or contract, a primary insurer’s liability to an insured for any
failure to act reasonably when considering settlement arises from its contractual relationship with
the insured. Because of the absence of any contractual relationship between a primary and an
excess insurer, concepts of duty and breach are less clear when a primary insurer’s failure to
settle implicates the excess insurer’s coverage, as opposed to an insured’s assets. The majority
of jurisdictions confronting this question have found that an excess insurer’s rights against a
primary insurer arise through the doctrine of equitable subrogation.5
 Under the doctrine of
equitable subrogation, an insurer paying a loss under a policy becomes subrogated to a cause of
action that the insured may have against a third party who caused the loss. An excess insurer can
use the doctrine of equitable subrogation to assert the insured’s right to insist that the primary
insurer use due care to avoid an excess judgment against the insured. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v.
American Home Assur. Co., 348 F.Supp.2d 940, 961 (N.D. Ill. 2004) (citing Westchester Fire
Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 183 F.3d 578, 582-83 (7th Cir. 1999)); Haddick Ex Rel.
Griffith v. Balor Ins., 198 Ill.2d 409, 261 Ill. Dec. 329, 763 N.D.2d 299, 303-04 (2001)). The doctrine of equitable subrogation thus allows an excess insurer to “step into the legal shoes” of the insured and acquire the insured’s right against the primary insurer. Id. Between excess and primary insurers, this duty comes into play in determining whether the primary insurer has been
negligent or has exercised bad faith in failing to settle a claim within primary limits.6

While the doctrine of equitable subrogation has been widely accepted, in contrast, the majority of courts considering the question have found that primary insurers have no direct duty to excess insurers. Two recent decisions have rejected the notion that any such direct duty exists and expressed certain limitations on the equitable subrogation rights available to an excess insurer in the context of a settlement in excess of the primary limits.
In Federal Ins. Co. v. Travelers Casualty & Surety Co., 843 So.2d 140 (Ala. 2002), the Alabama Supreme Court addressed two questions certified to it by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit: (1) whether, absent any specific contractual duty, a primary insurer is nevertheless obligated to perform the following duties when defending an insured; the duty of good faith to settle; the duty of good faith in deciding whether to settle; and the duty of good faith to keep the excess carrier informed of settlement negotiations and adverse developments;
and (2) whether an excess carrier, whose insured was never subject to a final judgment ordering the payment of money, that the insured, not its insurer, personally would have to pay, can be equitably subrogated to the rights of the insured arising out of any of the foregoing duties against the primary carrier in the conduct of its defense of the mutual insured. Id. at 142. In answer to the first set of certified questions, the Alabama Supreme Court held that “in the absence of contrary contractual obligations, a primary insurer owes no duty of good faith to an excess
insurer with respect to the settlement of a lawsuit against the insured.” Id. (reasoning that, because insured relinquishes to primary insurer the right to control defense and settlement,
primary insurer has duty of good faith to insure; however, because excess insurer did not
relinquish that right to primary insurer, “the primary-insurer/excess-insurer relationship does not
involve the same policy considerations that justify imposing on those insurers the duty of good
faith to settle that currently exist between an insured and his insurer.”)
In response to the second certified question, the Alabama Supreme Court recognized that
the doctrine of equitable subrogation has long been recognized in Alabama and that an excess
insurer “which pays an obligation incurred by its insured could be equitably subrogated to the
rights of its insured in order to seek reimbursement from some third-party wrongdoer.”
However, the court went on to reason that a “unique analysis” is applicable to an equitable
subrogation claim in the primary-insurer/excess-insurer context. Specifically, because the
insurer, through subrogation, “stands in the shoes” of the insured, its rights are no greater than
the insured. Because the insured in that case had no personal exposure with respect to the
judgment, due entirely to the availability of sufficient excess insurance, the court concluded that
the insured and, correspondingly, the excess insurer, would never be able to assert a bad faith
failure-to-settle claims against the primary insurer. Id. at 145.
Similarly, an Illinois appellate court held that Illinois law did not impose a direct duty on
the primary insurer to the excess carrier in U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. Zurich Ins. Co., 768 N.E.2d 288 (Ill. App. Ct. 2002). In doing so, the court rejected the pronouncement of another panel of the
Illinois appellate court in Schal Bovis, Inc. v. Casualty Ins. Co., 732 N.E.2d 1082 (Ill. App. Ct.
1999), that strongly suggested that a primary insurer did owe a direct duty to the excess insurer.
U.S. Fire Ins. Co., 768 N.E.2d at 297 (quoting Schal Bovis, 732 N.E.2d at 1092). In U. S Fire,
the insured and the primary insurer, Zurich, entered into a settlement agreement with the claimant, pursuant to which Zurich paid its remaining limits to the claimant in exchange for a
covenant not to execute against the assets of the insured. The excess insurer, U.S. Fire, then
assumed the defense of the insured and ultimately settled with the claimant for an amount in
excess of its policy limits. U.S. Fire later sued Zurich to recover both defense costs and amounts
paid in settlement under both a direct duty and equitable subrogation theory of recovery. The
U.S Fire court declined to follow the “prediction” in Schal Bovis that Illinois would recognize a
direct duty owed by a primary insurer to an excess insurer. It also dismissed U.S Fire’s equitable
subrogation claim against Zurich, finding that, as a subrogee of the insured, U.S Fire acquired no
greater rights than those of the insured. Because the insured had consented to the settlement and
executed a release of Zurich, any claim by the insured and, correspondingly, U.S Fire, as its
subrogee, was barred.
In contrast to the majority of states, New York courts have held that an excess insurer
may maintain a direct action against a primary insurer for bad faith. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins.
Co. v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., No. 91 Civ. 6151 (CMM) (S.D.N.Y. May 2, 1994); Hartford
Accident & Indemnity Co. v. Michigan Mut. Ins. Co., 93 A.D.2d 337, 342, 462 N.Y.2d 175 (1st
Dep’t 1983), aff’d, 61 N.Y.2d 569, 463 N.E.2d 608, 475 N.Y.S.2d 267 (1984); Hartford
Accident & Indemnity Co. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 751 F.Supp. 345, 347-48 (E.D.N.Y.
1990). Florida has also recognized a direct right of action on behalf of an excess carrier against a primary carrier. Colonia Ins. Co. v. Assuranceforeningen Skuld, 588 So.2d 1009, 1010-11 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1991) rev. den. 598 So.2d 75 (Fla. 1992). These decisions, however, represent the
minority view as most states hold that an excess insurer can recover from a primary insurer only
through the doctrine of equitable subrogation.
As these cases illustrate, predicating a primary insurer’s duty to an excess insurer on the
doctrine of equitable subrogation, as opposed to a direct duty, is more than a theoretical
distinction. Under the doctrine of equitable subrogation, an excess insurer’s rights are limited to
those that could be asserted by the insured, and in those instances where the insured consented to
the primary insurer’s decisions with respect to settlement or where the insured’s assets are not
put at risk, the excess insurer may be barred from proceeding against the primary insurer. Where
there is a direct duty, however, an excess insurer’s rights against the primary carrier are not
circumscribed by those of the insured and can be based upon duties owed directly by the primary
to the excess insurer.
2. Duty to Notify
Both primary and excess insurance policies impose upon the insured the contractual duty
to provide notice of a loss to the insurer. While language of such notice provisions may vary, the
purpose of all notice provisions is to enable the insurer to adequately investigate and respond to
claims. Aetna Casualty & Sur. Co. v. Murphy, 206 Conn. 409, 416, 538 A.2d 219, 222 (1988).
A typical primary level general liability policy may contain the following notice provision:
Duties in the Event of Occurrence, Offense, Claim or Suit
a. You must see to it that we are notified as soon as practicable of an
“occurrence” or an offense which may result in a claim. To the extent possible, notice
should include: (1) How, when and where the “occurrence” or offense took place;
(2) The names and addresses of any injured persons and witnesses; and
(3) The nature and location of any injury or damage arising out of the
“occurrence” or offense.
b. If a claim is made or “suit” is brought against any insured, you must:
(1) Immediately record the specifics of the claim or “suit” and the date
received; and
(2) Notify us as soon as practicable.
Excess policies also contain notice provisions which require the insured to notify the
excess insurer in the event of a loss that can reasonably be expected to reach the excess layer. A
typical excess policy notice provision may read:
Upon the happening of any occurrence reasonably likely to involve the coverage
of this policy, written notice containing particulars sufficient to identify the
insured and also reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place,
and circumstances thereof and the names and addresses of the injured and of
available witnesses, shall be given by or for the insured to the company or any of
its authorized agents as soon as practicable.
Thus, as a matter of contract, the duty to notify both the primary insurer and the excess
insurer lies with the insured. However, in the case of an excess insurer, it is not always clear
when the duty to notify attaches, as the extent of a potential loss may not become clear until
fairly late in the litigation. This analysis becomes even more complicated where a loss is
significant, but perhaps not viewed in the early stages as catastrophic, and the insured has multilayers
of excess coverage.
In Liberty Mutual Co. v. American Home Assure Co., supra, the first level excess policy
($20M excess of $5M SIR) required the insured to provide notice to the excess insurer “as soon
as practicable” of any “occurrence, claim, or suit which the Insured reasonably expects to deplete
the Underlying Amount . . . by more than 50%.” Liberty Mutual, 348 F.Supp. at 943. The second layer excess policy ($75M excess of $30M) required the insured to notify the insurer “as
soon as possible of any occurrence, claim or suit which may result in a ‘loss’ covered under this
policy.” In Liberty Mutual, the insured’s broker notified the first layer excess carrier the day
after being served with a lawsuit arising from a serious personal injury railroad crossing accident. Because of its $5 million SIR, the insured retained the right to investigate and defend
the lawsuit. Over the next year, counsel retained by the insured defended the case, reporting to
the first layer excess carrier, including his evaluation of the settlement value of the case between
$4M and $8.5M. After the case went to trial, but before the jury verdict was returned, the
insured’s broker notified the second layer excess insurers of the case. After the jury returned a
verdict in excess of $54M, one of the second layer excess carriers brought a cause of action
against the first layer excess insurer predicated primarily upon its failure to reasonably negotiate
a settlement of the underlying action. Paramount in the second layer excess carrier’s argument
was the failure of both the insured and the first layer excess carrier to notify it of the pendency of
the underlying case.
Ultimately, the Liberty Mutual court concluded that the first layer excess carrier had no
direct duty to the second layer excess carrier, and, thus, could not be liable to the second layer
excess carrier for failure to notify of the pending claim. However, the case illustrates the
controversies that can arise when high level excess carriers are not notified of a case that
ultimately implicates their layer. See also, D. Richmond, Rights and Responsibilities of Excess
Insurers, 78 Denv. U.L.Rev. 29, 34-44.
Controversies concerning duties of notification to excess carriers can also arise between self-insureds and their excess carriers. In such cases, the dispute is more likely to focus upon the
parties’ contractual rights as set forth in the language of notice provisions in the excess policies.
In Prince George’s County v. Local Government Insurance Trust, 159 Md. App. 471, 859 A.2d
353 (2004), cert. granted, 384 Md. 581, 865 A.2d 589 (January 12, 2005), a County, which was
self insured for $1,000,000 sought recovery, under its excess policy after a jury returned a $4.1M
verdict in a police wrongful entry case. The excess carrier, a non-profit association of local governments that contributed funds to a risk sharing pool, declined coverage based upon the
County’s failure to notify it before the verdict was rendered. 159 Md. App. at 473, 859 A.2d at
354-55. The excess policy consisted of three documents: the declaration page, the Excess
Liability Scope of Coverage and the Self-Insurance Excess Coverage Endorsement. The Scope
of Coverage required the County to notify the Trust “promptly of an occurrence, wrongful act or
accident which is likely to create an obligation under this Scope of Coverage.” Id. at 477, 859
A.2d at 356. The Endorsement, on the other hand, required the County to report certain “Losses”
within 60 days of learning of them. 159 Md. App. at 478, 859 A.2d at 357. The County argued
that the excess insurer had no right to deny coverage for failing to comply with what the County
claimed were two different and conflicting notice provisions.
The court found that the two notice provisions were not in conflict; rather, they served a
similar purpose at two different stages of a claim, each reinforcing the requirements of the other
as the claim passed from origination to disposition. 159 Md. App. at 483, 859 A.2d at 360. It
concluded that the County had, indeed, breached the notice requirements of the excess policy.
Id. at 484, 859 A.2d at 360. That did not end the disputes, however, as the court went on to
reason that such a breach, standing alone, was not sufficient to allow the excess insurer to deny
coverage. Id. Instead, the excess carrier was also required to establish that it had been
prejudiced by the breach, as required by the Maryland Insurance Code, Section 19-110 which precluded a liability insurer from disclaiming coverage unless the insurer can establish, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the lack of notice resulted in actual prejudice to the insurer.
Id.
The County argued that the insurer could demonstrate no prejudice, because it, not the
excess insurer, had the duty to defend the underlying case and the County had done so from its inception through the jury verdict. The court disagreed. It reasoned that showing “actual
prejudice” does not require the insurer to prove a negative. 159 Md. App. at 485, 859 A.2d at
361. Rather, in cases where the insurer has been deprived of all opportunity to defend, the mere
entry of the adverse judgment is affirmative evidence of actual prejudice to the insurer. Id.,
quoting Washington v. Fed. Kemper Ins. Co., 60 Md. App. 288, 295-96, 482 A.2d 503 (1984).
The Maryland appellate court looked to decisions from other states that have held that an excess
liability insurer is prejudiced as a matter of law when the insured fails to notify the insurer of a
lawsuit until after trial. Id., citing Kerr v. Ill. Cent. R.R. Co., 283 Ill. App.3d 574, 219 Ill. Dec.
81, 670 N.E.2d 759 (1996) (excess liability insurer prejudiced as a matter of law when insured
failed to notify insurer of lawsuit until after appellate court remanded suit to trial court for
determination of damages); Allstate Ins. Co. v. Kepchar, 592 N.E.2d 694 (Ind. Ct. App. 1992)
(excess liability insurer prejudiced as a matter of law when insured failed to notify insurer of
lawsuit until one year after trial). Other state courts have held that an excess insurer is
prejudiced as a matter of law when the insured notified it of a claim only a few weeks before
trial. 159 Md. App. at 486, 859 A.2d at 361-62 citing Highlands Ins. Co. v. Lewis Rail Serv.
Co., 10 F.3d 1247 (7th Cir. 1993) (excess liability insurer was prejudiced as a matter of law when
it was notified of a lawsuit only six weeks before trial); Greyhound Corp. v. Excess Ins. Co., 233
F.2d 630 (5th Cir. 1956) (excess liability insurer was prejudiced as a matter of law when it was
notified of a lawsuit only three weeks before trial). Cf. Herman Bros., Inc. v. Great West Cas. Co., 255 Neb. 88, 582 N.W.2d 328 (1998) (excess liability insurer was prejudiced as a matter of
law when the insured notified it of a claim after it had entered a tentative settlement agreement
and less than one week before payment of the settlement was to be made).
As these cases illustrate, when confronted with any case that has the potential for a large
jury verdict, all insurers on the risk at the time of the occurrence (or at the time the claim was
made and reported in the case of a claims-made policy) should be notified and kept apprised of
developments as the case progresses.
3. Defense Obligations: Primary vs. Excess Insurer
In general, the primary insurer has the duty to defend an insured against a potentially
covered claim or lawsuit. See e.g. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, Penn. v. Travelers
Ins. Co., 214 F.3d 1269 (11th Cir. 2000); Texas Employers Insurance Ass’n v. Underwriting
Members of Lloyds, 836 F.Supp. 398 (S.D. Tex. 1993); Travelers Cas. and Surety Co. v.
Transcontinental Ins. Co., 19 Cal.Rptr.3d 272, Cal.App.4.Dist. (2004); Maryland Casualty Co. v.
Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co., 97 Cal.Rptr.2d 374, Cal.App.4.Dist. (2000); U.S. Fidelity and Guar.
Co. v. Federated Rural Elec. Ins. Corp., 2001 Ok. 81 (2001); Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. CNA
Ins. Co., 2004 Vt. 93 (2004). The primary insurer’s duty to defend continues until the lawsuit is
concluded, the policy limits are exhausted, or there is no potential for coverage under its policy.
See Douglas R. Richmond, Rights and Responsibilities of Excess Insurers, 78 Denv. U.L.Rev.
29, 45 (2000)(citing Hartford Accident & Indem. Co. v. Superior Court, 29 Cal.Rptr.2d 32, 34-
36 (Ct.App. 1994); Foster-Gardner, Inc. v. Nat. Union Fire Ins. Co., 959 P.2d 265, 273 (Cal.
1998); Dairy Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 992 P.2d 93, 118-19 (Haw. 2000); Vigilant Ins. Co. 
In a case where it appears clear that the potential damages will exceed the primary policy
limits, the primary insurer may wish to avoid its duty to defend, and attendant costs of defense,
by tendering its limits to the tort plaintiff or the excess insurer. The problem for the primary
insurer, however, is that the plaintiff will not likely accept the primary limits knowing there is
excess coverage and the excess insurer will not accept the tender because it has no obligation to
defend until the primary coverage is exhausted by payment of a judgment or settlement. Id.
Although it does not have a duty to defend, an excess insurer may have a contractual
right to participate in the insured’s defense where the excess policy limits may be implicated.
Such a contractual right to participate, however, does not rise to the level of a duty to defend
because the right is to protect the insurer rather than the insured and the contractual language
itself does state any such duty. See Interstate Fire & Cas. Co. v. Underwriters at Lloyd’s,
London, 139 F.3d 1234 (9th Cir. 1998); State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Jioras, 29 Cal.Rptr.2d 840,
844 (Ct. App. 1994); Int’l Ins. Co. v. Sargent & Lundy, 609 N.E.2d 842, 855 (Ill.App.Ct. 1993);
Interstate Fire & Cas. Co. v. Archdiocese of Portland, 899 F.Supp. 498, 501 (D.Or. 1995), aff’d
sub nom. An excess insurer that exercises its contractual right to participate in the defense of the
insured without issuing a reservation of rights will not be precluded by doctrines of waiver and
estoppel from later raising coverage defenses. See e.g. Montgomery Ward and Co., Inc. v. Home Ins. Co., 753 N.E.2d 999 (Ill.App.1.Dist. 2001). This is because it is a liability insurer's duty to
defend that gives rise to the need to reserve rights when defense of a claim is undertaken. Id.
Since an excess insurer does not have a duty to defend, it is not required to reserve its rights. An
excess insurer, however, may still want to participate subject to a reservation of rights purely as a
precautionary measure.
Where the primary insurer is required to pay the defense costs until such time as its
policy is exhausted, the question arises whether the excess insurer should be required by equity to contribute to those costs for which it has received a benefit. The minority view is that the
excess insurer should be required to share in those costs. See Employers Ins. Co. v. Gen.
Accident Ins. Co. v. Underwriting Members of Lloyds, 836 F.Supp. 398, 405 (S.D. Tex.
1993)(quoting 14 COUCH ON INSURANCE § 51:36, at 446 (2d ed. 1982)(excess insurer may
be required to share in the defense costs on a pro rata basis)). The majority view, however, is
that the excess or umbrella carrier is responsible for defense costs only after the primary policy
limits have been exhausted.
Once the underlying insurance is exhausted and the excess insurer’s duty to defend is
triggered, the excess insurer will be responsible for defense costs. Where the excess insurer
wrongfully refuses to defend after the primary policy is exhausted, a primary insurer that pays
the defense costs may seek reimbursement from the excess insurer. See Hartford Accident &
Indem. Co. v. Super. Ct., 29 Cal.Rptr.2d 32, 34-35 (Ct. App. 1994). On the other hand, where
the primary insurer fails to assume the defense and the insured would otherwise be left without a
prompt and proper defense the excess insurer may determine to pay the defense costs. See e.g.
Motors Ins. Co. v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 555 S.E.2d 37 (Ga.App. 2001); Grange Mut. Cas. Co.
v. Rosko, 767 N.E.2d 1225 (Ohio.App.7.Dist.Mahoning 2001); New Hampshire Indem. Co., Inc.
v. Budget Rent-A-Car Systems, Inc., 64 P.3d 1239 (Wash. 2003). In that event, the excess insurer should be entitled to recoup its costs from the primary insurer. New Hampshire Indem.
Co., Inc., 64 P.3d 1239; Motors Ins. Co., 555 S.E.2d 37 (Ga.App. 2001).
4. Allocation
Generally, an excess carrier has no liability until the primary policy is exhausted. Mayor
& City Council of Baltimore, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 145 Md. App. 256, 802 A.2d 1070
(2002) (citing United States Fire Ins. Co. v. Maryland Casualty Company, 52 Md. App. 269 271-2, 447 A.2d 896 (1982)). In the context of long-tail claims that span multiple policy years,
courts have employed a variety of different allocation methods to apportion responsibility for
indemnity among insurers and, in some cases, the insured.
A detailed analysis of these allocation methodologies is beyond the scope of this paper.
It is important to note, however, that these are court-imposed methodologies that most often are
stated to be grounded upon equitable concepts, as opposed to contractual rights and obligations.
A growing number of courts have held in recent decisions that the obligation to
indemnify an insured in cases that involve continuous or progressive injury or damage is to be
prorated among carriers based upon their time on the risk over the triggered period. Mayor &
City Council, 145 Md. App. at 266, 802 A.3d at 1076 (triggered primary insurance policies and
self-insured periods of asbestos installer obligated to indemnify based upon time on the risk,
rejecting the insured’s proffered “joint and several” or “all sums” allocation method as
incompatible with injury-in-fact/continuing trigger). The Mayor and City Council court
reasoned that a “time on the risk” rationale conformed with the realities of long-term property
damage and the application of the injury in fact/continuous trigger of coverage. It went on to
impose a horizontal exhaustion requirement, i.e., that the City (as a garnishee that stepped into
the place of the insured asbestos installer) be required to exhaust all primary insurance before
seeking indemnity from excess insurers. Id. Excess insurance would come into play only if the underlying policies had been exhausted, i.e., only after the primary carriers or self-insurers had
fulfilled their irrespective allocations. Id. The court further held that an insured who elects not
to carry liability insurance for a period of time, either by electing to be self-insured or by purchasing a policy which excludes coverage for a particular risk7 would be liable for a pro-rated
share that corresponds to the period of self insurance or no coverage. Mayor & City Council,
145 Md. App. at 309, 802 A.2d at 1101-02.
In Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Co. v. Stonewall Ins. Co., 71 P.3d 1097 (Kan.
2003), the Kansas Supreme Court also ruled that self-insured retentions constitute primary
insurance for the purpose of progressive injury claims and, as such, must be exhausted by the
insured before it could seek recovery under excess policies. In that case, the court endeavored to
give effect to the intent expressed under the terms of the excess policies, concluding that the selfinsured
retentions were “other insurance” within the meaning of the policies at issue. Id. at
1129.
Conclusion
Decisional law regarding the relationships and obligations between insureds, selfinsureds, primary insurers and excess insurers continues to evolve. As the size of verdicts inevitably increases, additional tensions are injected into these relationships which will undoubtedly lead to more litigation between these parties. As the cases illustrate, communication throughout the life of a claim, from first notice to the insured through resolution, can mitigate the likelihood of coverage litigation, decreasing both risk and expense for all concerned.Legal Corner: Obligations of insurer and the insured
June 27, 2012 - 9:56:01 pm
The insurance contract is one of the contracts that play an important role in the economic life in the country as the insurance companies provide the logistical support and insure the large and small projects against the threatening risks which are expected to occur at any time. The idea of insurance can be known simply through the Civil Law No. 22/2004 as the insurance is a contract whereby the insurer is committed to pay the insured party or the beneficiary who spoke on condition of insurance in his favor a sum of money or income salary or any other financial compensation in the event of an accident or the risk set forth in the contract in an equivalent premium or any other financial payment to be done by the insurer to the insured party.

We reviewed the insurance policy in the previous article and today we will point out the obligations of the insured party and the obligations of the insurer to provide a comprehensive overview of the insurance contract in general as the basic obligations of the insured party summarise that the insured party has to clearly mention at the time of conclusion of the contract all the circumstances known to him as they matter to the insurer in order to assess the risks that he shall take upon himself and consider a necessity in particular the facts which the insurer put in place of specific questions written in the insurance contract.

The insured party is also committed to inform the insurer the conditions, during the contract, which would lead to increasing the risk as soon as he knew them.

He is also committed to pay to the insurer against the insurance the “premium” on the due date. The insured party also undertakes to take the initiative to inform the insurer of all incidents that would make him liable under the terms of the insurance policy.

The law points out that the insurance contract is subject to revocation for the benefit of the insurer, if the insured party kept mum about something or provided a wrong statement that changes the subject of the danger or reduces its gravity or the possibility of its occurrence in the eyes of the insurer.

It adds that during the term of the contract if the insured risks increased, the insurer can notify the insured party to consider the contract as dissolved, unless the insured party, during the term specified by the insurer, accepted an increase, against the insurance, that commensurates with the emergency increase in the danger.

If the determination of insurance fees took into account the considerations that would increase the risk that has been insured, then these considerations removed or their importance was lessened in the course of the contract, the insured party in spite of all contrary agreement, can demand to terminate the contract without claiming any compensation or demand to reduce the fees of insurance for the succeeding period with what commensurates with the removal of these considerations, according to the effective insurance rate on the day the contract is concluded.

Finally, the insured party shall pay each installment of the premiums at the beginning of each period, unless otherwise agreed upon. The period of the insurance means the period for which the installment is calculated, and in case of doubt the period of insurance shall be one year.

If the insured party did not pay the premium even if the insurer warned him of the same, the insurance contract shall be ineffective upon the lapse of thirty days from the date of dispatch of the warning. Any agreement that exempts the insurer from warning the insured party or lessens the stipulated period of 30 days from the date of sending the warning shall be null

and void.

In contrast, the insurer is committed, upon the occurrence of the insured risk or at maturity specified in the contract, to pay the due insurance amount within thirty days from the day the right holder submits the necessary data and documents to establish his right.

In damage insurance, the insurer is committed to indemnify the insured party for the damage resulting from the occurrence of the insured risk, provided that it must not exceed the amount of insurance.

If there are several insurance policies on one thing or the same interest with the amounts worth more than the combined value of the insured thing or interest, every insurer is obliged to pay a part of the compensation equivalent to the ratio between the amount insured with him and the combined value of insurance, but the total amount paid to the insured party must not exceed the value of damage.

With regard to the insurance of damages, the insurer shall replace legally because of the compensation that paid to him, in suits of the insured party before the person who is responsible for the damage of the insured item, unless responsible person for the damage is a relative or one of in-laws of the insured person or the one who enjoys with him the same livelihhod or a person for whom the insurer is responsible.

The insurer, towards the insured party, shall not be responsible for all or part of the amount of insurance, if his approach to his place became impossible because of the insured party.

In all cases in which the insurer restores the insurance of what is insured with him including the dangers to the others, the insurer alone shall remain responsible towards the insured party or the beneficiary.
“In any study of the obligations of
insurer and insured under liability
coverages, there is no avoiding the
oft-used insurer admonition, ‘Read
Your Policy.’ ”
Obligations of Insurer
and Policyholder
by Martin C. Pentz, Esq. and Jeremy A. M. Evans, Esq.
§ 1.1 Introduction
The insurance relationship is primarily one of contract, with the insurance policy as
the principal source of the parties’ obligations. As with other types of insurance, the
duties of the parties—and the consequences of breaching those duties—are affected
by government regulation, primarily in the form of state statutes addressing insurer
conduct. Another source of law affecting insurance obligations is the judiciary. As
liability insurance disputes became a staple of the courts’ civil dockets during the
second half of the twentieth century, recurring issues generated a significant body
of common law. Nevertheless, in any study of the obligations of insurer and insured
under liability coverages, there is no avoiding the oft-used insurer admonition, “Read
Your Policy.”
The primacy of the contract language has important consequences for any effort
to survey the parties’ obligations. First and foremost, it means that those obligations
will vary from case to case depending on the wording of the policy in issue. The
challenge imposed by this fundamental fact is ameliorated to some degree by the
practice of the insurance industry, dating back to the 1930s, of writing insurance
primarily on standard forms developed by rate-making organizations such as the
Insurance Services Office. In the business context, perhaps the most widely used
of these forms is the “Commercial General Liability” or “CGL” form (previously called
the “Comprehensive General Liability” form). This eBook focuses on the duties of
insurer and policyholder under the CGL policy.
---------------
ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Driving Business Advantage

by Martin c. Pentz, esq. and Jeremy a. M. evans, esq.foley hoag ebook

Obligations of insurer and Policyholder




Table of Contents§ 1.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................01§ 1.2 Obligations of the Insurer ...............................................................................02§ 1.2.1 the duty to defend ............................................................................................03 (a) scope: the “comparison test” ...........................................................................04 (b) insurer Obligation of “reasonable Performance” ..................................................10 (c) termination of the defense Obligation .................................................................12 (d) the duty to defend and the “Mixed claim” ...........................................................16 (e) control of the defense .......................................................................................19 (f) defense expenses and Policy limits ...................................................................22 (g) consequences of breach of the duty to defend ...................................................24§ 1.2.2 the duty to “indemnify” ......................................................................................29 (a) the “facts” for Purposes of indemnity .................................................................31 (b) limits of liability; insurer responsibility for interest and costs ..............................34§ 1.2.3 the duties to investigate and to settle ................................................................36§ 1.3 Obligations of the Policyholder ......................................................................41§ 1.3.1 the Policy application and the insured’s disclosure Obligations .............................42§ 1.3.2 the notice Obligation ........................................................................................47 (a) notice under “Occurrence”-basis Policies ............................................................48 (b) notice under claims-Made Policies .....................................................................52§ 1.3.3 the duty to cooperate .......................................................................................57 (a) in general .........................................................................................................57 (b) the “Voluntary Payments” clause ........................................................................59 (c) Pre-tender costs ...............................................................................................61§ 1.3.4 the duty to Mitigate damages ............................................................................63




EXHIBIT A—Court’s Order Staying Litigation  in Eastern Enterprises v. Hanover Insurance Co. .......................................................66EXHIBIT B—Court’s Order Staying Discovery in  Commercial Union Insurance Co. v. RohmTech, Inc ...................................................67EXHIBIT C—Court’s Allowance of Protective Order in  American Policyholders Insurance Co. v. Nyacol Products, Inc.................................70About Foley Hoag LLP ....................................................................................................75Martin c. Pentz, esq. ......................................................................................................75Jeremy A. M. Evans, Esq.................................................................................................75ebook reprinted with kind permission from  Massachusetts liability insurance Manual - comprehensive coverage, expert guidance  1st edition 2000, updated 2009. copyright © 2000, updated 2009, Mcle, inc.




“ In any study of the obligations of insurer and insured under liability coverages, there is no avoiding the oft-used insurer admonition, ‘Read Your Policy.’ ”




Obligations of Insurer  and Policyholder  by Martin c. Pentz, esq. and Jeremy a. M. evans, esq.§ 1.1 Introductionthe insurance relationship is primarily one of contract, with the insurance policy as the principal source of the parties’ obligations. as with other types of insurance, the duties of the parties—and the consequences of breaching those duties—are affected by government regulation, primarily in the form of state statutes addressing insurer conduct. another source of law affecting insurance obligations is the judiciary. as liability insurance disputes became a staple of the courts’ civil dockets during the second half of the twentieth century, recurring issues generated a significant body  of common law. nevertheless, in any study of the obligations of insurer and insured under liability coverages, there is no avoiding the oft-used insurer admonition, “read your Policy.”the primacy of the contract language has important consequences for any effort  to survey the parties’ obligations. first and foremost, it means that those obligations  will vary from case to case depending on the wording of the policy in issue. the challenge imposed by this fundamental fact is ameliorated to some degree by the practice of the insurance industry, dating back to the 1930s, of writing insurance primarily on standard forms developed by rate-making organizations such as the insurance services Office. in the business context, perhaps the most widely used  of these forms is the “commercial general liability” or “cgl” form (previously called the “comprehensive general liability” form). this ebook focuses on the duties of insurer and policyholder under the cgl policy.the purpose of cgl insurance is to protect the policyholder against loss  occasioned by third-party liability claims. thus, it is not surprising that, at least in the context of coverage disputes, the most important and controversial insurer and policyholder obligations are those invoked when a claim or the potential for a claim arises. commercial general liability policies do impose obligations on insurers and policyholders that are independent of claims. Perhaps the most obvious is the policyholder’s obligation to pay policy premiums when due. the policyholder under  

1




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

a standard cgl form must also submit to insurer inspections of its business premises, allow examinations of its records and undergo premium audits. the insurer under the standard form also has obligations in addition to paying claims, such as its obligation to give notice of cancellation or notice of an intent not to renew.this ebook will focus on the obligations of the cgl insurer and policyholder in connection with third-party claims. the fundamental insurer obligations are the  duty to defend and the duty to indemnify. these duties, as well as the associated insurer right to control disposition of the claim, have spawned corollary duties to investigate claims and settle those that reasonably should be settled. the first part  of this ebook examines Massachusetts law with respect to each of these insurer obligations, with a special emphasis on their ramifications in the context of insurance coverage litigation.the second part of this ebook examines claim-related duties of the policyholder.  the discussion begins with the policyholder’s disclosure obligations in connection  with the purchase of the policy. technically independent of claims, these obligations tend to come to the fore after the claim is made, usually in the context of “misrepresentation” disputes. the remaining policyholder obligations discussed below serve the purpose of fostering an optimal environment for the insurer’s discharge of its claim-related responsibilities. such is the purpose, for example, of the policyholder duty to give prompt notice of “occurrences” and claims and of the insured’s duty to cooperate with the insurer in the defense of third-party lawsuits. these and related policyholder duties are addressed in the second part of this ebook with a particular focus on the effect of a policyholder breach on the insurer’s obligation, if any, to continue to perform.§ 1.2 Obligations of the Insurerthe obligations of the insurer under a cgl policy flow primarily from the “insuring agreement(s)” of the policy form. current forms include separate insuring agreements for bodily injury and property damage liability, “personal” and “advertising injury” liability, and medical payments, but the nature of the insurer’s basic undertaking is little changed from the venerable 1973 form, which was in use until 1986. the insuring agreement of that form provided:

2




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

the company will pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because ofa. bodily injury orb. property damageto which this insurance applies, caused by an occurrence, and the company shall have the right and duty to defend any suit against the insured seeking damages on account of such bodily injury or property damage, even if any of the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or fraudulent, and may make such investigation and settlement of any claim or suit as it deems expedient, but the company shall not be obligated to pay any claim or judgment or to defend any suit after the applicable limit of the company’s liability has been exhausted by payment of judgments or settlements.this insuring agreement imposes on the insurer two distinct duties: (1) the duty to “pay on behalf of” the policyholder all sums the insured becomes “legally obligated  to pay as damages” because of injury or damage to which the insurance applies, commonly referred to as the duty to indemnify; and (2) the duty (and right) to defend any suit against the policyholder alleging a covered liability. it also confers on the insurer the prerogative to investigate and settle any potentially covered claim or suit, a prerogative the insurer is duty bound to exercise reasonably. these four insurer duties—to defend, indemnify, investigate and settle—are examined in the sections that follow.§ 1.2.1  The Duty to Defendthe defense provisions of cgl policies have been aptly referred to as “litigation insurance.” See Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. 355, 358, 708 n.e.2d 639, 642 (1999). as stated by the supreme Judicial court in Rubenstein: “[t]he promise to defend the insured, as well as the promise to indemnify, is the consideration received by the insured for payment of the policy premiums. although the type of policy here considered is most often referred to as liability insurance, it is ‘litigation insurance’ as well, protecting the insured from the expense of defending suits brought against him.” Id. at 358, 708 n.e.2d at 642 (quoting Brohawn v. Transamerica Ins. Co., 347 a.2d 842, 851 (Md. 1975)). the obligation is not merely one of reimbursement. essential 

3




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

to the cgl defense concept is the undertaking of “responsibility for defending the insured,” Id. at 358, 708 n.e. 2d at 642, which means assuming the burden of retaining, supervising and compensating the defense team, including defense counsel.the insurer’s “litigation insurance” obligations flow not only from the liability insuring agreement quoted above, but also from the so-called “supplementary Payments” clause. that clause, as appearing in the current standard form, requires the insurer  to pay, in addition to all defense expenses it incurs, items such as the following: • costs taxed against the insured; •  prejudgment interest awarded against the insured on the part of the judgment the insurer pays; •  all postjudgment interest on the entire amount of the judgment until the insurer pays or tenders its part of the judgment; • premiums on appeal bonds to release attachments; and •  expenses incurred by the insured at the insurer’s request. indeed, it is the “supplementary Payments” section of the standard cgl policy that makes clear that the costs of defense—and of the other items listed—do not reduce (i.e., are in addition to) the policy limits of liability. (a) Scope: The “Comparison Test”the defense obligation arises when a defense is needed: at the outset of the suit. it follows that, unlike the duty to indemnify (which depends on the “true” facts as they are determined in the underlying action), the duty to defend arises from the facts as alleged in the complaint. See Trustees of Tufts Univ. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 415 Mass. 844, 847, 616 n.e.2d 68, 71 (1993); Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. 677, 681, 195 n.e.2d 514, 516–17 (1964). the process for determining the defense duty—often spoken of as a “comparison test”—is one of “envisaging what kinds of losses may be proved as lying within the range of the allegations of the complaint, and then seeing whether any such loss fits the expectation of protective insurance reasonably generated by the terms of the policy.” Continental Cas. Co. v. Gilbane Bldg. Co., 391 Mass. 143, 147, 461 n.e.2d 209, 212 (1984) (quoting Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 318, 458 n.e.2d 338, 341 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984)). Once the 

4




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

defense obligation arises, it ordinarily continues until the suit is resolved—notwithstanding that the facts proved at trial ultimately may show the liability to be outside the scope of coverage. See Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 681–82, 195 n.e.2d at 516–17. the classic formulation of the “comparison test,” as articulated in Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Casualty Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 458 n.e.2d 338 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984), is as follows:[t]he question of the initial duty of a liability insurer to defend third-party actions against the insured is decided by matching the third-party complaint with the policy provisions: if the allegations of the complaint are “reasonably susceptible” of an interpretation that they state or adumbrate a claim covered by the policy terms, the insurer must undertake the defense.Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. at 318, 458 n.e.2d at 340 (emphasis added). Webster’s Third New International Dictionary defines “adumbrate” to mean “to give a sketchy representation of; outline broadly, omitting details…  or to suggest, indicate, or disclose partially and with a purposeful avoidance of precision.” See Open Software Found., Inc. v. United States Fid. & Guar. Co., 307 f.3d 11, 15 n.4 (1st cir. 2002) (relying on Webster’s definition in applying Sterilite test). in accord with this definition, the Sterilite court held as follows:“in order for the duty of defense to arise, the underlying complaint need only show, through general allegations, a possibility that the liability claim falls within the insurance coverage. there is no requirement that the facts alleged in the complaint specifically and unequivocally make out a claim within the coverage.” Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. at 319–20, 458 n.e.2d at 341–42 (quoting Union Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Topsham, 441 a.2d 1012, 1015 (Me. 1982)). thus, the insurer is free of the duty to defend only where “the allegations lie expressly outside the coverage and its purpose.” Terrio v. McDonough, 16 Mass.app.ct. 163, 168–69, 450 n.e.2d 190, 194 (1983).the sources discussed seem to support the proposition that, where the complaint  is silent on a matter that may determine the applicability of coverage, the defense obligation attaches. having in mind the “plasticity” of notice pleading, such a rule tends to result in insurer defense obligations for many claims that will ultimately fall within  

5




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

a policy exclusion. for this reason, insurers have been reluctant to fully embrace Sterilite’s articulation of the scope of the duty to defend. in advocating a somewhat less generous measure, insurers have contended, for example, that a complaint otherwise falling within a policy exclusion that contains an exception must affirmatively allege facts falling within the exception for a defense obligation to attach. some of the phrasing of the supreme Judicial court’s decision in Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. SCA Services, Inc., 412 Mass. 330, 588 n.e.2d 1346 (1992), discussed below, seems to support such a view.in Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. SCA Services, Inc., the waste disposal firm sca sought a defense in connection with a lawsuit against it seeking cleanup of a landfill  to which it had transported industrial and chemical wastes for disposal. the firm’s insurers disclaimed any duty to defend, relying on a pollution exclusion containing  an exception granting coverage where the release of pollutants was “sudden and accidental.” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. SCA Servs., Inc., 412 Mass. 330, 331–35, 588 n.e.2d 1346, 1347–49 (1992). in opposing a motion for summary judgment filed by its insurers, sca, citing Sterilite, contended that the insurers had failed to show there was “no possibility that ‘[a]t least one claim against [it] may involve a ‘sudden and accidental’ discharge.’” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. SCA Servs., Inc., 412 Mass. at 337, 588 n.e.2d at 1350 (quoting Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 318–19, 458 n.e.2d 338, 340–41 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984)). the supreme Judicial court rejected this contention, stating, inter alia, that “[i]f the underlying complaint does not allege a ‘sudden and accidental’ discharge, the resulting damage is eliminated from coverage by the exclusion clause, even though the discharge might qualify as a [covered] ‘occurrence’ within the policy terms.” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. SCA Servs., Inc., 412 Mass. at 335, 588 n.e.2d at 1349. relying on this phrasing, insurers have contended that a complaint (or agency “notice of responsibility”) silent as to the nature of pollutant releases—i.e., that does not specifically allege a “sudden and accidental” release—does not give rise to a duty to defend. See, e.g., Atlantic Mut. Liab. Ins. Co. v. Beatrice Cos., 924 f.supp. 861 (n.d.ill. 1996).it appears, however, that the supreme Judicial court did not intend by this one sentence to change long-standing rules for determining the duty to defend. the SCA Services decision can be readily harmonized with the Sterilite “comparison test” in light of the extraordinarily specific allegations of the underlying complaint against sca. after examining those allegations at some length, the court concluded that “[t]he only reasonable reading of the complaint is… that the pollution of the landfill occurred gradually over several months of repeated activity and not as the result of a ‘sudden 

6




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

“ It appears, however, that the Supreme Judicial Court did not intend by this one sentence to change long-standing rules for determining the duty to defend.”and accidental’ discharge.” Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. SCA Servs., Inc., 412 Mass. 330, 336, 588 n.e.2d 1346, 1350 (1992). in other words, the court found not merely that there was no specific allegation of a “sudden and accidental” discharge, but that the allegations were antithetical to proof of such an event. See Landauer v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 36 Mass.app.ct. 177, 181–82 & n.12, 628 n.e.2d 1300, 1302–03 & n.12 (1994) (complaints asserting pollution of landfill “as a concomitant part of a regular business activity” did not allege facts reasonably susceptible of falling within exception to exclusion); cf. Arrow Auto. Indus. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 8 Mass.l.rptr. 225 (Middlesex super.ct. Jan. 29, 1998) (department of environmental Protection (“deP”) notice of responsibility under g.l. c. 21e invoked the defense duty where it did not “preclude the possibility that the releases were ‘sudden and accidental.’”).the possible encroachment of the SCA Services opinion on the “comparison test” was at least circumscribed by the supreme Judicial court’s decision in Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 429 Mass. 196, 706 n.e.2d 1135 (1999). in Simplex, the policyholder was confronted with asbestos products liability claims alleging, in general terms, that the claimants were injured due to exposure  to simplex products. the policies in issue contained a product hazard exclusion applicable to all simplex divisions except the “hitemp” division. Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 196–99, 706 n.e.2d at 1135–37. the claimants’ complaints were silent, however, as to whether the products were manufactured by hitemp or by one or more of simplex’s other divisions. Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 199, 706 n.e.2d at 1137. the court held that simplex was entitled to a defense despite the possibility that hitemp products were not involved, explaining that “‘the insurer’s duty to defend its insured arises whenever the allegations in a complaint state a cause of action that gives rise to the possibility of recovery under the policy; there need not be a probability of recovery.’” 

7




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 199, 706 n.e.2d at 1137 (quoting 7c John a. appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 4863.01, at 67 (West rev. ed. 1979)). the court “decline[d] to alter this well-settled standard.” Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 199, 706 n.e.2d at 1137.relying on Highlands Insurance Co. v. Aerovox, Inc., 424 Mass. 226, 676 n.e.2d 801 (1997), and SCA Services, the insurer argued that simplex had failed to sustain a burden “to prove that the underlying complaints pertain to hitemp products.” Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. 196, 200, 706 n.e.2d 1135, 1137 (1999). the court held that simplex had no such burden, noting that Highlands involved the duty to indemnify and that the Highlands court allocated the burden to prove the applicability of the “sudden and accidental” exception to the policyholder  for deterrent purposes not applicable to simplex. Simplex Technologies, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 200, 706 n.e.2d at 1137–38. the court saw  “no reason for placing on simplex the burden of proving that the underlying plaintiffs allege… injuries arising from exposure to hitemp products.” Simplex Technologies, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. at 200, 706 n.e.2d at 1138.it is, at best, unclear whether the Simplex court viewed SCA Services (like Highlands) as imposing a special burden on the policyholder in the pollution exclusion context.  it did not describe SCA Services as requiring a policyholder, faced with a neutral complaint (i.e., one that describes events such that the exception to the exclusion may, or may not, apply), to unearth allegations of a sudden accident in order to invoke the defense duty. rather, it stated only that, in SCA Services, “we held that the allegations of the underlying complaint did not allege a ‘sudden and accidental’ event covered by the policy.” Simplex Technologies v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 429 Mass. 196, 200 n.4, 706 n.e.2d 1135, 1138 n.4 (1999). as has been discussed, this holding of SCA Services was based on a conclusion that the underlying complaint alleged the contrary. See Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. SCA Servs., Inc., 412 Mass. 330, 336, 588 n.e.2d 1346, 1350 (1992). Particularly given the Simplex court’s clear endorsement of a defense duty arising based on the possibility of recovery under the policy, one might have expected a quite specific description of an “SCA Services exception” to the “possibility” standard if the Simplex court had viewed that case as making such an exception. the first circuit’s reasoning in Barrett Paving Materials v. Continental Insurance Co., 488 f.3d 59 (1st cir. 2007) supports this conclusion. On the basis of the same “possibility” standard employed in Massachusetts, the first circuit held under Maine law that where “the complaint does not specify how the pollutants may have been released” there is a duty to defend so long as the allegations “are not entirely inconsistent with a sudden and accidental discharge.”  Barrett Paving Materials v. 

8




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Continental Insurance Co., 488 f.3d at 64. in reaching this conclusion, the first circuit distinguished A. Johnson & Co. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 9 f.2d 66 (1st cir. 1991), in which, just as in SCA Services, there was no duty to defend because the allegations were entirely inconsistent with a sudden and accidental discharge. even if there remains any uncertainty on this point under Massachusetts law, however, what is clear after Simplex is that, any special exceptions aside, the “comparison test” remains the basic yardstick for the defense duty in Massachusetts. in certain cases, however, the “comparison test” may not be the end of the inquiry. What if information omitted from the complaint, yet available to insurer or insured, tends to contradict the outcome of the comparison test? the result depends on whether the information is coverage-affirming or coverage-defeating. as to the former scenario, even if the defense duty is not apparent on the face of the complaint, it attaches nevertheless if additional facts “known or readily knowable by the insurer” indicate that the claim is covered. Desrosiers v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 393 Mass. 37, 40,  468 n.e.2d 625, 628 (1984). accordingly, the potential for coverage—and thus the defense duty—can be established by facts omitted from the complaint. See also Boston Symphony Orchestra v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 406 Mass. 7, 10–11, 545 n.e.2d 1156, 1158 (1989) (insurer required to defend under liability policy covering defamation where complaint alleged only breach of contract, but additional facts known to insurer indicated allegations of harm to reputation). But see Transamerica Ins. Co. v. KMS Patriots, L.P., 52 Mass.app.ct. 189, 194–95 (2001) (insurer not required to defend absent evidence in record to demonstrate insurer was aware— and not merely in a position to learn—of interrogatory answer triggering coverage).On the other hand, unless the potential for coverage is eliminated, the insurer ordinarily cannot rely on information from sources outside of the complaint to avoid its defense duty. as put by the Sterilite court:as to whether even solid information reaching the insurer from the insured, and indicating that claimed losses were in fact uninsured, could itself relieve the insurer of its duty to defend, [the decision in Lee v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 178 f.2d 750 (2d cir. 1949)] says: “this language [requiring the insurer to defend even a baseless claim] means that the insurer will defend the suit, if the injured party states a claim, which, qua claim, is for an injury ‘covered’ by the policy; it is the claim which determines the insurer’s duty to defend; and it is irrelevant that the insurer may get information from the insured, or anyone else, which indicates, or even demonstrates,  that the injury is not in fact ‘covered.’” 

9




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 324 n.17, 458 n.e.2d 338, 344 n.17 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984) (quoting Lee v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 178 f.2d 750, 751 (2d cir. 1949)). can the insurer take action itself to eliminate the potential that the third party’s claim will fall within the coverage? Massachusetts law answers this question affirmatively only in limited circumstances, which are discussed in § 1.2.1(c) below.(b) Insurer Obligation of “Reasonable Performance”the supreme Judicial court has made clear that, in undertaking a duty to defend,  an insurer impliedly assumes a duty of “reasonable performance” of that obligation. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. 387, 396 (2003). in the court’s words, an insurer, “by undertaking the defense of its insured as mandated by contract, engage[s] in affirmative action, and that action expose[s] its insured’s legally protected interests to the risk of harm. the insurer’s action, therefore, [gives] rise to a duty of reasonable performance, the violation of which [is] tortious.” Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 396. in Sullivan, an insurer had terminated its defense of the underlying action after  the complaint was amended to bring the claim outside the coverage of the policy. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 395. the court held  that the termination was justified. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 395. the policyholder nevertheless pressed a breach-of-contract claim, asserting that the defense provided by the insurer before the amendment was deficient, and prejudicial to the insured. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 395. the court agreed that the insurer owed the policyholder a duty to conform to a standard of “reasonable performance” in the conduct of the defense, but stated that this duty sounded in tort and was separate from its contractual duty to defend. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 396–97. it held that the insurer discharged its contractual duty by hiring defense counsel, and that any claim that the insurer breached its related duty of reasonable performance was  “a claim for tortious conduct, specifically negligence.” Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 397. the court therefore affirmed a grant of summary judgment for the insurer on the policyholder’s contract action. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 397. One practical effect of this ruling was that the damages award that the policyholder did secure was found subject to reduction (by 42 percent) for the policyholder’s comparative negligence. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 410. 

10




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

“ Since an insurer is not permitted to practice law, it must rely on outside counsel for conduct of litigation.”the Sullivan court also had occasion to discuss the nature of the insurer’s duty of reasonable performance of the defense and the requisites of proof of a breach of that duty. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 402–06. it explained that, ordinarily, the standard of reasonable conduct of the defense is not  a matter within the common knowledge of the lay person where that standard is not specifically set forth in the contract. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 402–03. because the standard of care is analogous to that owed by professionals to their clients, the general rule is that expert testimony is needed to establish the insurer’s negligence. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co.,  439 Mass. at 403. Only where negligence is so gross or obvious that jurors can rely on their common knowledge to recognize or infer negligence may the case be made without expert testimony. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass.  at 403. in Sullivan, the court held that opinion testimony given by the insured’s  own claim examiners constituted admissions as to the duty of care owed by an insurance company to its insured. such admissions, the court found, were the functional equivalent of expert testimony from which a jury could infer the elements  of negligence and causation. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 403.the damages allegedly suffered by the policyholder in Sullivan flowed, in large  part, not from the supervisory activity of the insurer’s personnel, but from alleged negligence on the part of the attorney appointed by the insurer. an issue therefore arose with respect to whether the insurer should be held to be vicariously liable  for any negligence of appointed counsel. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins.  Co., 439 Mass. at 406. the Sullivan court answered this question in the negative, equating the attorney hired by the insurer to an independent contractor, rather than an agent of the insurer. since an insurer is not permitted to practice law, it must rely on outside counsel for conduct of litigation. a lawyer hired by an insurer to represent an insured owes an unqualified duty of loyalty to the insured and must act at all times to protect the insured’s interests. it is the lawyer who controls the strategy, conduct, 

11




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

and daily details of the defense. since the conduct of the litigation is the responsibility of and controlled by counsel, the insurer ordinarily is not vicariously liable for the negligence of the attorney who conducts the defense for the insured. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 408–09. the Sullivan court found this general rule to be applicable in the case before it and therefore limited the policyholder’s damages to those traceable to its claims handlers’ negligent supervision of appointed counsel. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co.,  439 Mass. at 412.the general rule that an insurer has no vicarious liability for negligent activity of  its appointed counsel will yield where the insurer directs, commands, or knowingly authorizes acts or omissions of the attorney, i.e., where the insurer so controls  the attorney that it is inaccurate to characterize the attorney as an independent contractor. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 409 (citing Trau-Med of Am., Inc. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 71 s.W.3d 691, 697 (tenn. 2002)). the Sullivan court expressly rested its holding in the case before it on testimony by the appointed attorney that the insurer did nothing to interfere with his ability to provide  a complete defense to the policyholder in the underlying action. Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. at 410.(c) Termination of the Defense Obligationif the allegations of the third-party complaint “find apparent lodgment in the effective coverage of the policy” or facts omitted from the complaint indicate that the claim may be covered, then, absent a conspiracy to defraud the insurer, it is obligated to defend. Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 323, 458 n.e.2d 338, 343 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984). But see Espinal v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 47 Mass.app.ct. 593, 598–99, 714 n.e.2d 844, 847–48 (1999) (where auto insurer believed claimant and insured had conspired to defraud insurer as to whether accident even occurred, insurer could disclaim defense duty and file declaratory action against insured and claimant seeking to establish fraud). as noted, the insurer cannot be relieved of this duty “by dint of its own assertion that there is no coverage in fact,” Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. at 324, 458 n.e.2d at 344, but it “can, by certain steps, get clear of the duty from and after the time when it demonstrates with conclusive effect on the third party that as a matter of fact—as distinguished from the appearances  of the complaint and policy—the third party cannot establish a claim within the insurance.” Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. at 323, 458 n.e.2d at 343 (emphasis added). in other words, the insurer can terminate a defense obligation by confining the claimant’s case to one not falling within the coverage of the policy. until this is accomplished, however, the insurer’s “initial” duty to defend must be honored.

12




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

the Sterilite court described “steps” an insurer might take to terminate its obligation, including “[a] declaratory action, in which the necessary interests are represented”—i.e., in which the claimant has been joined. Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 323, 458 n.e.2d 338, 344 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984). the court offered that the insurer may also “make  the demonstration when brought into the third-party action upon impleader by the insured.” Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. at 323, 458 n.e.2d at 343. for a variety of practical reasons, “steps” such as these are not always attractive to insurers. for example, an insurer may be reluctant to litigate directly  with the claimant out of concern that doing so may cast a spotlight on the availability of insurance to satisfy a judgment. the insurer’s participation also may cause the claimant to attempt to “spin” its case so as to maximize the likelihood that the policy will be found to apply. for this reason, insurers have often sought to litigate the defense question in an action solely with the insured. the potential efficacy of such an action was discussed by the supreme Judicial court in Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. v. Belleville Industries, 407 Mass. 675, 555 n.e.2d 568 (1990). the Belleville court first endorsed generally the Sterilite reasoning, observing:the need to have the underlying claimant bound by any judicial declaration concerning the insurer’s duty to defend…exists because, until there is an unalterable determination as to the nature of the underlying claim, any declaration of rights concerning the insurer’s duty to defend cannot be conclusive.Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. at 686, 555 n.e.2d at 575.the court then went on, however, to suggest two situations in which a declaratory action not involving the claimant might terminate an insurer’s duty to defend. such  an action, it noted, may suffice where the dispute is concerned exclusively with “the meaning of language in an insurance policy.” Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. 675, 685, 555 n.e.2d 568, 575 (1990); see also Dorchester Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. First Costas Corp., 49 Mass.app.ct. 651, 653, 731 n.e.2d 569, 571 (2000). the court added:We do not discount the possibility of an action solely between an insurer and an insured concerning the insurer’s duty to defend, where the complaint in the underlying action is so general as to allege a claim arguably falling within the coverage of the policy, but it is apparent from the event that gave rise to the underlying claim that  the loss is not covered by the insurance policy. 

13




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. at 686, 555 n.e.2d at 575 (emphasis added) (citing Atlantic Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Cook, 619 f.2d 553 (5th cir. 1980) (alabama law)). thus, Belleville described “the possibility” of an exception to the requirement of binding the claimant where the absence of coverage is “apparent from the event that gave rise to the underlying claim.” Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. at 686, 555 n.e.2d at 575.the scope of the Belleville endorsement of insurer/insured–only actions on the defense question has yet to be fully revealed. it is instructive, however, to examine the single decision cited by the supreme Judicial court as illustrating the situation  in which the absence of coverage is “apparent from the event,” the Cook case.  in Cook, the mother of a deceased child sued her own mother—the child’s grandmother—alleging that the grandmother entrusted the child to a drunkard, resulting in the child’s death. Atlantic Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Cook, 619 f.2d 553 (5th cir. 1980) (alabama law). the complaint omitted the undisputed fact that the child was killed in a collision of an automobile driven by the drunkard. Atlantic Mut. Fire  Ins. Co. v. Cook, 619 f.2d at 554. the grandmother sought coverage under her homeowner’s policy, not her automobile policy, and the carrier disclaimed based on  a motor vehicle use exclusion—i.e., an exclusion stating that the policy did not include automobile liability coverage. Atlantic Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Cook, 619 f.2d  at 554. in a declaratory action by the homeowner’s carrier, the fifth circuit held  that “the insurer is not barred by the silence of the [tort action] complaint from establishing, by proof of the complaint-omitted but uncontroverted facts, that it had no duty to defend the tort suit.” Atlantic Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Cook, 619 f.2d at 555; see also Farm Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Whelpley, 54 Mass.app.ct. 743, 747 (2002) (requirement of binding claimant inapplicable where extrinsic undisputed fact not to  be litigated at the trial of the underlying action takes the case outside the coverage).an insurer/insured–only action will not be an appropriate vehicle to terminate the defense duty when the insurer’s coverage defense hinges on factual issues related to the issues in the underlying tort action. See Atlantic Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Cook, 617 f.2d 553, 555 (5th cir. 1980) (citing Smith v. North River Ins. Co., 360 so.2d 313 (ala. 1978)). this is true for two reasons. the first reason is that, because the underlying claimant would not be bound by the facts found in an insurer/insured–only action, the coverage determination would not be conclusive; it could only “relieve the insurer of a current duty to defend based on then-current circumstances.” Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. 675, 686, 555 n.e.2d 568, 575 (1990). cases following the Cook pattern  are appropriate for declaratory relief precisely because the indisputable character  

14




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

of the event renders the likelihood of relitigation remote, thus satisfying the teaching of the declaratory Judgments act that declaratory relief should be rendered only where the judgment will “terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceedings.” g.l. c. 231a, § 3. Where the coverage issues are intertwined with facts to be determined in the underlying case, however, the coverage action becomes an uncertain exercise in predicting what facts will be proved in the underlying action, and the rendering of declaratory relief becomes inappropriate.a second reason why a court may decline to reach coverage issues related to those of the underlying case is the potential for prejudice to the insured’s defense. the leading case recognizing this problem is the decision of the supreme court of california in Montrose Chemical Corp. v. Superior Court, 861 P.2d 1153 (cal. 1993). in Montrose, the insured brought an action for declaratory relief when its carriers failed to defend it against claims under the comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act (cercla, codified at 42 u.s.c. § 9601 et seq.), alleging environmental contamination due to the company’s manufacturing of the insecticide ddt. addressing the duty to defend, the court held that by showing a potential that the cercla claims would be covered, Montrose had established its entitlement to a defense, and that the insurers, having failed to foreclose the potential for coverage by undisputed facts, were not in a position to terminate their defense duty. Montrose Chem. Corp. v. Superior Court, 861 P.2d at 1163–64.as to appropriate management of the declaratory and underlying cases, the court commented:to eliminate the risk of inconsistent factual determinations that  could prejudice the insured, a stay of the declaratory relief action pending resolution of the third party suit is appropriate when the coverage question turns on facts to be litigated in the underlying action. for example, when the third party seeks damages on account of the insured’s negligence, and the insurer seeks to avoid providing  a defense by arguing that its insured harmed the third party by intentional conduct, the potential that the insurer’s proof will prejudice its insured in the underlying litigation is obvious. this is the classic situation in which the declaratory relief action should be stayed. by contrast, when the coverage question is logically unrelated to the issues of consequence in the underlying case, the declaratory relief action may properly proceed to judgment. . . .

15




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Montrose Chem. Corp. v. Superior Court, 861 P.2d at 1162 (citations omitted). although the Massachusetts appellate courts have yet to confront this issue, at least three superior court judges have stayed coverage cases due to potential prejudice  to the insured’s defense of the underlying claim. See Eastern Enters. v. Hanover Ins. co., no. 93-01458 (Middlesex super.ct. aug. 30, 1994); Commercial Union Ins. Co. v. RohmTech, Inc., no. 94-2231 (Middlesex super.ct. June 16, 1995); American Policyholders Ins. Co. v. Nyacol Products, Inc., 4 Mass.l.rptr. 10 (Middlesex. super.ct. Jan. 31, 1996). copies of the orders issued in these three cases are reproduced as Exhibits A, B and C.to recapitulate, the “initial” duty to defend under a liability policy is necessarily based on allegations, rather than facts. if the allegations of the complaint or additional information available to the insurer indicate a potential that the insurer ultimately  will be required to indemnify the policyholder, then, absent fraud, the duty to defend attaches, notwithstanding the insurer’s belief that the claim, as ultimately proved,  will fall outside the coverage. under certain circumstances, an insurer may be able  to terminate its defense duty prospectively by means of a declaratory action or otherwise, but it is recognized that in many cases, such a determination “may not come until the third-party action is fully tried, and in that case the duty to defend continues to the end, even if the result of the action is favorable to the insured and there is no judgment against the insured that the insurer needs to make good.” Sterilite Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 17 Mass.app.ct. 316, 323 n.15, 458 n.e.2d 338, 344 n.15 (1983), review denied, 391 Mass. 1102, 459 n.e.2d 826 (1984).(d) The Duty to Defend and the “Mixed Claim”the insurer under a cgl policy must defend if the complaint shows a possibility  that the claim, as ultimately proven, will fall within the scope of the policy’s coverage. frequently, however, a complaint will assert multiple claims or at least will be pleaded in multiple counts, some of which are within and some clearly outside the scope  of coverage. Must the insurer defend the entire action? May the insurer confine its defense efforts to the covered counts of the complaint? the supreme Judicial  court has not yet spoken definitively on the issue. But see Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co.  v. Continental Cas. Co., 413 Mass. 730, 732 n.1, 604 n.e.2d 30, 32 n.1 (1992) (observing in a footnote that “the weight of authority places the duty to defend  all counts on an insurer which has the duty to defend at least one count of a  complaint”). both the appeals court and the first circuit, however, have predicted that Massachusetts will embrace the majority position, which requires the insurer  to defend an entire “mixed claim.” See Palermo v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 42 Mass.app.ct. 283, 289–90, 676 n.e.2d 1158, 1163–64 (1997) (insurer, whose defense 

16




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

duty was triggered by negligence count, could not properly refuse to defend  counts alleging nuisance and breach of restrictive deed covenants); Mt. Airy Ins.  Co. v. Greenbaum, 127 f.3d 15, 19 (1st cir. 1997) (“under Massachusetts law, if  an insurer has a duty to defend one count of a complaint, it must defend them all”).if an insurer does defend an entire action, including noncovered counts, might it  then be entitled to recoup any of its costs from the insured? the cases just cited provide little reason to suspect that such a right exists, and until 1997 there was scant support for such a right in the case law of other jurisdictions. the landscape changed, however, with the decision of the supreme court of california in Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d 766 (1997). in Buss, a primary liability carrier, having defended an entire action against its insured, sought restitution of defense costs it had paid that were attributable to the 26 counts of a 27 count complaint that were not covered by its policies. See Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d at 770. in a ruling that has proved controversial, the court, while affirming a primary carrier’s duty to defend an entire “mixed action,” nevertheless held that the insurer did have a quasi-contractual right to secure reimbursement for costs incurred in defending noncovered counts. See Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d at 776.it is far from clear that the Buss restitution concept will find favor in the Massachusetts courts. in Metallized Products, Inc. v. Travelers Insurance Co.,  no. MicV-2002-03452, 2003 Mass.super. leXis 279, at *17 (Middlesex super.ct. sept. 17, 2003), the insured brought a declaratory judgment action against its insurer seeking a determination that it was liable for the insured’s costs in defending and settling an underlying case. in holding that the insurer had a duty to defend, the court explained that the insured need prove only that the insurer owed the duty to defend on any claim or part of any claim or “a possibility that the liability claim falls within an insurance coverage.” if that is shown, the insurer owes a duty to defend the entire action (covered and uncovered claims). Metallized Prods., Inc. v. Travelers Ins. Co., 2003 Mass.super. leXis 279, at *17. the court went on to order the insurer to pay the insured all of the costs of the defense in the underlying case despite the fact that only some of claims in the underlying case were potentially covered. Metallized Prods., Inc. v. Travelers Ins. Co., 2003 Mass.super. leXis 279, at *17–18. 

“ …under Massachusetts law, if an insurer has a duty to defend one count of a complaint, it must defend them all.”

17




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Practice Note the Metallized Products award of damages (in the full amount of defense costs)  at least suggests that Massachusetts courts have assumed that the rule requiring  a defense of the entire action imports a requirement that the insurer bear all  defense costs. Massachusetts authorities addressing “allocation” in the context of claims arising from injuries spanning multiple policy periods show that the courts do not readily infer that the extent of coverage provided by an insurance policy necessarily is limited to that which triggers the coverage. See Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 44 Mass.app.ct. 842, 849–50 (1998); see also Chicago Bridge & Iron Co. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, 59 Mass.app.ct. 646, 653–61 (2003) (determining that policy language obligated insurer to reimburse policyholder in full for defense and settlement costs incurred responding to claims arising from roughly fifty years of environmental contamination despite the fact that the policies were in effect for only nine of the fifty years). Practice Note cases such as Rubenstein and Chicago Bridge & Iron further suggest that Massachusetts courts may reject the reasoning of Buss and—absent compelling differences in policy language—may not be receptive to insurer requests for apportionment in the “mixed” claims context.indeed, it remains to be seen whether a restitution right, even if recognized by the courts, would be of practical value to insurers. the Buss court held that an insurer is entitled to reimbursement only of defense costs “that can be allocated solely to the claims that are not even potentially covered.” Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d at 778 (emphasis added). as to why the insurer’s recovery should be so limited, the court explained:it is as to defense costs that can be allocated solely to the claims  that are not even potentially covered that the insurer has not been paid premiums by the insured. by contrast, the insurer has in fact been paid as to costs that can be allocated solely to the claims that are at least potentially covered. so too as to costs that can be allocated jointly to the claims that are at least potentially covered and to those that are not—by definition, these costs are fully attributable to the former as well as the latter.

18




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d at 778 (footnote omitted). the court emphasized that “[d]efense costs which were required in any event or would have been incurred  in order to defend actually or potentially covered claims, whether or not joined with noncovered claims, cannot be recovered.” Buss v. Superior Court, 939 P.2d at 778 n.15. accordingly, even in a jurisdiction that adopts Buss, if the various counts of a complaint all arise from a common fact pattern, it is unlikely that the defense benefit will be sharply curtailed by insurer reimbursement rights.(e) Control of the Defensethe insuring agreement quoted earlier confers on the insurer not only the duty, but also the right, to conduct the policyholder’s defense. this can be a valuable right, in that it reserves to the insurer the functions of selecting and supervising counsel, meaning that the insurer “controls” the conduct of the defense. Often, however, an insurer’s reservation of a right to disclaim coverage will place the insurer’s own interests in conflict with the interests of the insured, making it inappropriate for the insurer to insist on retaining control of the defense. the classic example is that of  a third-party complaint alleging that the claimant was injured as a result of the policyholder’s negligence or, in the alternative, by his or her commission of an intentional tort. because liability policies exclude coverage for injuries the policyholder intended to inflict, it will be in the insurer’s financial interest for the claimant to prove the intentional tort (which may not invoke the insurer’s duty to indemnify), rather  than negligence (which ordinarily will lead to an indemnification obligation). in such circumstances, the policyholder will be understandably reluctant to cede control of the defense to the insurer. can the policyholder insist on retaining control and also retain the financial benefit of the insurer’s defense obligation?Well-established Massachusetts case law answers this question in the affirmative: where the insurer has a conflict of interest due to a reservation of a right to disclaim coverage, the insured will be permitted to select counsel independent of the insurer and control the defense, and the insurer will be obliged to pay the reasonable costs of that defense. the seminal decision is Magoun v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.,  346 Mass. 677, 195 n.e.2d 514 (1964). in Magoun, the policyholder was sued  for alleged negligence in connection with a fatal construction accident. the insurer reserved the right to disclaim coverage based on a policy “loading exclusion”  but offered to defend subject to that exclusion. the policyholder declined the  insurer’s offer, hired independent counsel and defended the case successfully.  the policyholder then sued the insurer to recover the fees charged by independent counsel. Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 678–80, 195 n.e.2d  at 515–16.

19




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

the Magoun court held that liberty’s “initial liability to defend” was established by the complaint, because it “was not sufficiently specific, at least in failing to mention that loading a truck was involved, to show that the case was within the loading exclusion.” Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 681, 195 n.e.2d at 517. as for whether the insured was entitled to reimbursement of its defense expenses despite its refusal of the insurer’s offer to defend, the court observed that an “insurer’s discretion under the covenant to defend is not unlimited.” Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 684, 195 n.e.2d at 518. reasoning that the insurer could have addressed the conflict situation in the policy but did not, the supreme Judicial court held that the policyholder was entitled to reimbursement. Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 685, 195 n.e.2d at 519.the Magoun court emphasized that the insurer acquiesced in the defense of the insured by independent counsel. Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. 677, 685, 195 n.e.2d 514, 519 (1964). it is doubtful, however, that the court intended to suggest that the insurer is free to object—while still maintaining its reservation—and thereby avoid coverage. it is more likely that the court had in mind that the insurer might be entitled to continue to control the defense if, but only if, it was prepared to waive its reservation. although it was not necessary for the court to reach the question due to the successful defense, it pointed to case law from other jurisdictions holding that an insurer that purports to insist “both on retaining control and upon its reservation of rights” will be estopped from denying liability for any recovery by the claimant. Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 683 & n.5, 195 n.e.2d at 518 & n.5. thus, at least where the sufficiency of policy limits is not in question, Magoun leaves open the possibility that an insurer may regain its right to defend by agreeing to drop an asserted reservation. See Herbert A. Sullivan, Inc. v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 439 Mass. 387, 406–07 (2003) (“When an insurer seeks to defend its insured under a reservation of rights, and the insured is unwilling that the insurer do so, the insured may require the insurer either to relinquish its reservation of rights or relinquish its defense of the insured and reimburse the insured for its defense costs.”) (citations omitted). three concluding observations are in order. “ …the insurer could have addressed the conflict situation in the policy but did not, the Supreme Judicial Court held that the policyholder was entitled to reimbursement.”

20




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

•  First, it is not necessarily the case under Massachusetts law that any reservation by the insurer will entitle the policyholder to retain independent counsel at the insurer’s expense. the Magoun court emphasized the existence of a conflict between insurer and insured with respect to the handling of the underlying claim. courts in other jurisdictions have suggested that some reservations will not create a conflict. for example, in Public Service Mutual Insurance Co. v. Goldfarb, 425 n.e.2d 810 (n.y. 1981), the new york court  of appeals observed that independent counsel is necessary only where the “question of coverage is… intertwined with the question of the insured’s liability.” Public Serv. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Goldfarb, 425 n.e.2d at 815. if the basis for the reservation does not give rise to any insurer incentive to encourage establishment of liability on a noncovered ground, then independent counsel is not necessary. this argument remains open in Massachusetts.•  Second, the fact that the insured is entitled to control the defense does not mean that the insurer is entitled to no role whatever. in Magoun, the supreme Judicial court recognized that “[t]he insurer… reasonably may be reluctant to entrust its possible obligation to indemnify to counsel not of its own selection.” Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. 677, 684, 195 n.e.2d 514, 519 (1964). the insured’s duties of cooperation and of good faith and fair dealing still obtain and must be observed. Cf. Magoun v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 346 Mass. at 685, 195 n.e.2d at 519 (emphasizing cooperation of insurer and insured in successful defense). courts of other jurisdictions have held that these duties require the insured to retain competent counsel who will bill reasonably for his or her services. See, e.g., CHI of Alaska, Inc. v. Employers Reinsurance Corp., 844 P.2d 1113 (alaska 1993). Presumably, however, the policyholder will do just that in guarding its own best interests, particularly where the costs are incurred before a court has declared the insurer’s duty to defend.•  Third, as suggested above, an insurer is responsible for paying only “reasonable” costs incurred in the defense of the insured. See Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. 93, 97, 686 n.e.2d 989, 992 (1997); see also Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Continental Cas. Co., 771 f.2d 579, 582 (1st cir. 1985) (assigning burden of proof as to reasonableness of costs to insured). the finder of fact is accorded “wide discretion” in determining whether the insured’s costs were reasonable. Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 44 Mass.app.ct. 842, 850, 694 n.e.2d 381, 386–87 (1998). despite this wide discretion, policyholders that elect to challenge an insurer’s assessment of reasonableness may take some comfort in Watts Water Techs., Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 

21




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

22 Mass. l. rep. 659, *32 (Mass. super. ct. 2007), in which the superior court held that the reasonableness of fees should not be examined in light of the price the insurer would have paid had it assumed the defense without reservation, but rather by comparison to the rates charged by attorneys in the area to non-insurers for similar work. (f) Defense Expenses and Policy Limitsas noted in the introduction to this section, § 1.2.1, the “supplementary Payments” provision of the standard cgl policy indicates that costs of defense are in addition  to indemnity amounts (i.e., they do not draw down the limits of liability of the policy).  a distinct question is when the insurer is permitted to stop defending. the liability insuring agreement quoted earlier states that “the company shall not be obligated  to pay any claim or judgment or to defend any suit after the applicable limit of the company’s liability has been exhausted by payment of judgments or settlements.” insurers have raised the question under this and similar language whether they  can tender to the claimant or pay into court the full amount of their potential indemnity obligation (i.e., the amount of the applicable limit) and thereby escape  from any further duty to defend. the answer in Massachusetts, as in the majority  of jurisdictions, is “no”: such a payment will not cut off the defense duty. instead,  the defense obligation ends only when the insurer has paid its liability limit to satisfy (in whole or in part) a judgment against the insured or a settlement with the claimant. See Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Sullivan, 33 Mass.app.ct. 154, 597 n.e.2d 62 (1992) (construing automobile liability policy).

“ …the company shall not be obligated  to pay any claim or judgment or to defend any suit after the applicable limit of the company’s liability has been exhausted by payment of judgments or settlements.”

22




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

in Sullivan, the court noted that, under this rule, in the case of multiple claims against the insured, good faith settlement with one claimant, or payment of all or part of a judgment favoring one claimant,… would have the effect of discharging the insurer from defending additional claims beyond the policy limits.… the insurer having exhausted the policy limits and provided a defense, the insured could not reasonably expect more. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Sullivan, 33 Mass.app.ct. 154, 157–58, 597 n.e.2d 62, 64–65 (1992). the court was concerned, however, that in the “tender” situation proposed by the insurer, “an insurer would be free, regardless of the merits of a… claim, to tender the coverage limits to the claimant and decline to defend further whenever the insurer anticipates that the cost of providing a defense would exceed the amount of coverage.” Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Sullivan, 33 Mass.app.ct. at 158, 597 n.e.2d at 65. the court rejected this approach, suggesting that if it were followed, the duty to defend would be “significantly nullified in a large number of cases.” Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Sullivan, 33 Mass.app.ct. at 158, 597 n.e.2d at 65. the Sullivan court’s rationale applies with equal force to general liability policies. See, e.g., Medical Prof’l Mut. Ins. Co. v. Newton-Wellesley Hosp., no. 984705c, 1999 Mass.super. leXis 529, at *11–12 (Middlesex super.ct. dec. 14, 1999) (under Sullivan, insurer’s duty to defend under professional liability policy continues through conclusion of litigation). thus, although the Sullivan rule has been abrogated as to automobile policies by amendment of the approved language of the standard automobile policy form, see Thompson v. Arbella Mut. Ins. Co., 1999 Mass.super. leXis 95, at *8 (Middlesex super.ct. feb. 3, 1999), it would seem still to be valid for general liability policies.furthermore, an insurer’s duty to defend generally encompasses an obligation to appeal from an adverse judgment against its insured, if reasonable grounds exist to believe that the insured’s interest might be served by the appeal. Davis v. Allstate Ins. Co., 434 Mass. 174, 180 (2001); see also Medical Prof’l Mut. Ins. Co. v. Newton-Wellesley Hosp., 1999 Mass.super. leXis 529, at *11–12 (insurer’s duty to defend may involve the duty to fund an appeal if the policyholder has a reasonable likelihood of success on appeal). if an insurer appeals from an adverse judgment against its insured, it may be required to pay postjudgment interest under the supplemental payments provision of the policy. Davis v. Allstate Ins. Co., 434 Mass. at 181.

23




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

(g) Consequences of Breach of the Duty to DefendWhere an insurer breaches a duty to defend a policyholder against a suit, the policyholder has a breach of contract claim against the insurer. in such an action,  the policyholder is entitled to recover contract damages, i.e., “those that cannot  be reasonably prevented and arise naturally from the breach, or which are reasonably contemplated by the parties.” Delano Growers’ Coop. Winery v. Supreme Wine Co., 393 Mass. 666, 680, 473 n.e.2d 1066, 1075 (1985). the most obvious element  of such damages is the reasonable sum incurred by the policyholder in providing for its own defense. the debate over the further consequences of the insurer’s breach has focused on two questions: the effect of the breach on the indemnity obligation and the recoverability of attorney fees and expenses incurred by the policyholder in establishing the insurer’s duty to defend.Effect of Breach of Duty to Defend on Duty to Indemnify in certain jurisdictions, an insurer that wrongly refuses to defend an insured and fails to seek a declaratory judgment as to coverage will be “estopped” from raising policy limitations or exclusions to avoid an indemnity obligation, regardless of the merit of its coverage defenses. See, e.g., Clemmons v. Travelers Ins. Co., 430 n.e.2d 1104, 1109 (ill. 1981). in Camp Dresser & McKee, Inc. v. Home Insurance Co., 30 Mass.app.ct. 318, 568 n.e.2d 318 (1991), the appeals court predicted that the supreme Judicial court would endorse a similar rule. Camp Dresser & McKee, Inc. v. Home Ins. Co., 30 Mass.app.ct. at 326, 968 n.e.2d at 636 (defense-breaching insurer “liable for the reasonable costs of both defense and settlement”). the “automatic indemnity” concept of Camp Dresser was repudiated, however, in the supreme Judicial court’s decision in Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indemnity Co., 414 Mass. 747, 610 n.e.2d 912 (1993).Polaroid was another case involving cgl coverage for hazardous waste–related liability. after Polaroid corporation (“Polaroid”) tendered claims to its insurers for defense, the insurers simply refused to defend or indemnify, taking no further action. the trial court determined that the insurers were under a duty to defend based on the allegations of the government claimants but cut off the duty as of the date it allowed the insurers’ motion for summary judgment based on the pollution exclusion. the  trial court’s judgment declared that the insurers had no further obligation to Polaroid. Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. 747, 749–50, 610 n.e.2d 912, 914–15 (1993). On appeal, Polaroid contended that the insurers, having breached their duty to defend, were automatically liable for the costs of its settlement with the government claimants, relying on Camp Dresser. the supreme Judicial court disagreed.

24




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

the Polaroid court rejected any per se rule and “align[ed] [itself] with those authorities that treat an insurer’s unjustified refusal to defend as a breach of contract and seek then to determine what is recoverable as contract damages.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. 747, 762, 610 n.e.2d 912, 921 (1993). the court observed that, ordinarily, the failure to defend will not be the cause of any payment made in settlement or to satisfy a judgment, Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. at 762–63, 610 n.e.2d at 921–22, but allowed that “an obligation to pay settlement costs could result from a breach of the duty to defend.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. at 764, 610 n.e.2d at 922. to illustrate, the court stated that “if an insured lacks financial resources sufficient to maintain a proper defense, an insured’s losses in the underlying claim could well be the result of a breach of the duty to defend.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass.  at 764, 610 n.e.2d at 922.although unwilling to join the ranks of the “estoppel” courts, the Polaroid court did fashion one very important nonmonetary sanction for the defense-breaching insurer.  it joined the new york court of appeals in holding that “an insurer that wrongfully declines to defend a claim will have the burden of proving that the claim was not within its policy’s coverage.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. 747, 764, 610 n.e.2d 912, 922 (1993) (citing Servidone Constr. Corp. v. Security Ins. Co., 477 n.e.2d 441, 445 (n.y. 1985)). thus, even if the burden of proof on a particular coverage issue normally would fall to the insured, the defense-breaching insurer will bear that burden in seeking to avoid an indemnity obligation. Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. at 764 n.22, 610 n.e.2d at 922 n.22. Accord Swift v. Fitchburg Mut. Ins. Co., 45 Mass.app.ct. 617, 624–25, 700 n.e.2d 288, 293–94 (1998).the Massachusetts superior court has begun to wrestle with the implications of  the Polaroid burden-shifting rule. in Arrow Automotive Industries v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 10 Mass.l.rptr. 380 (Middlesex super.ct. June 24, 1999), Judge van gestel was confronted with a motion in limine concerning allocation of the burden of proof in a case in which another judge (fabricant, J.) had determined that the insurer (liberty Mutual) had breached its duty to defend the policyholder (arrow) in connection with pollution claims by the department of environmental Protection. relying on Polaroid, the court concluded that the burden to prove the inapplicability of indemnity coverage fell to liberty Mutual. the court explained:normally, the party having the burden of proof is required to put in its affirmative case first.… but here, to compel liberty Mutual to do so would be requiring proof of a negative—that no covered discharges 

25




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

took place—in a vacuum. this court is, however, fully cognizant of  its wide discretion on the question of the order of the presentation  of evidence.… to avoid the possibility of presenting in emptiness evidence that something did not happen, this court will borrow from the law in the employment discrimination field… and establish a two-stage order of proof.arrow will have the burden of producing credible evidence demonstrating that releases [of contaminants] did occur [during the policy periods]. this is a burden of production only, not a burden of proof. if such evidence is presented, then the burden of proof will be on liberty Mutual to demonstrate that there is no coverage.if liberty Mutual fails to prove that the policies it issued to arrow…  do not cover arrow’s claim,… then it will bear the burden of proving apportionment between amounts covered by such policies and amounts not covered.Arrow Automotive Indus. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 10 Mass.l.rptr. at 381 (citations omitted).it is questionable whether this two-stage order of proof is fully consistent with Polaroid. it may be that the supreme Judicial court’s intent was to allocate to  the defense-breaching insurer not only the burden to show that a given set of circumstances falls outside the coverage, but also to show what set of circumstances the claimant would have set out to prove—which may be the more difficult task. in any event, consistent with its underlying rationale to avoid presentation of evidence “in a vacuum,” the insured’s initial burden under Arrow Automotive seems limited to providing a context in which the insurer’s evidence can be evaluated. the Polaroid rule thus retains considerable teeth even if Arrow Automotive is applied. as one example, where an insured seeks coverage for environmental claims under a policy excluding such claims unless they result from “sudden and accidental” causes, credible evidence of property damage during the policy period should provide a context sufficient to satisfy the insured’s burden of production under Arrow Automotive. the burden would then shift to the insurer to prove that the causative release was not “sudden and accidental,” which, in many cases, will be an extremely difficult burden to sustain. See Goodman v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Corp., 413 Mass. 807, 593 n.e.2d 233 (1992) (precise cause of tank leak unknown). insurers also bear the similarly difficult burden of proof to allocate liability, and thus coverage, between covered and noncovered events in a “mixed claim” situation. See Swift v. Fitchburg Mut. Ins. Co., 45 Mass.app.ct. 617, 700 n.e.2d 288 (1988).

26




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Fee Shifting“the usual rule in Massachusetts is to prohibit successful litigants from recovering their attorney fees and expenses except in a very limited class of cases.” Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. 93, 95, 686 n.e.2d 989, 991 (1997) (citing Waldman v. American Honda Motor Co., 413 Mass. 320, 597 n.e.2d 404 (1992)). in other words, Massachusetts follows the “american rule,” requiring litigants to bear their own fees and expenses. Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. 93, 95, 686 n.e.2d 989, 991 (1997). until 1997, Massachusetts courts had given scant indication that the “very limited class of cases” excepted from this rule would include suits seeking to enforce an insurer’s duty to defend. the landscape was altered dramatically, however, with the supreme Judicial court’s release of Gamache.the Gamache case involved a claim under a homeowner’s policy for a defense against a suit by a police officer alleging that the insured had injured the officer in  the course of the insured’s arrest. Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass.  93, 93, 686 n.e.2d 989, 990 (1997). the insurer filed a declaratory action seeking to establish that the policy’s “intentional act” exclusion excused it from furnishing a defense. Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. at 93, 686 n.e.2d at 990. the supreme Judicial court, having concluded that the insurer did have a duty to defend, addressed the insured’s request for recovery of fees and expenses incurred in establishing that duty. after acknowledging its general adherence to the “american rule,” the supreme Judicial court nevertheless concluded that an exception was warranted in suits concerning the defense obligation, because the absence of such  a rule would “permit[ ] the insurer to do by indirection that which it could not do directly.” the court went on to explain:that is, the insured has a contract right to have actions against him defended by the insurer, at its expense. if the insurer can force him into a declaratory judgment proceeding and, even though it loses in such action, compel him to bear the expense of such litigation, the insured is actually no better off financially than if he had never had the contract right mentioned above.“ The usual rule in Massachusetts is to prohibit successful litigants from recovering their attorney fees and expenses except in a very limited class  of cases.”

27




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. at 96–97, 686 n.e.2d at 992 (quoting 7c John a. appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 4691, at 283 (West rev. ed. 1979)). thus, the court held that “an insured under a homeowner’s policy… is entitled to the reasonable attorney fees and expenses incurred in successfully establishing the insurer’s duty to defend under the policy.” Preferred Mut. Ins. Co. v. Gamache, 426 Mass. at 98, 686 n.e.2d at 993.because the Gamache decision was carefully limited to homeowner’s policies, many insurers contended that it did not apply to cgl insurance and, further, that it did not apply to coverage actions instituted by the insured. these positions were advanced by the insurer in Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. 355, 708 n.e.2d 639 (1999). the supreme Judicial court was not persuaded, however, that these distinctions should change the result. Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. at 357, 708 n.e.2d at 641. the supreme Judicial court emphasized that its benefit-of-the-bargain analysis in Gamache spoke to the nature of liability insurance, not the character of the policyholder, whether homeowner or business entity. Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. at 357–59, 708 n.e.2d at 641–43. the court further saw “no logical reason to distinguish between insureds who successfully establish their liability insurer’s duty to defend… by hinging recovery on whether the insured or the insurer initiated the coverage action.” Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. at 358, 708 n.e.2d at 642.finally, the Rubenstein court observed that the Gamache fee-shifting rule applies without any need of showing bad faith or other wrongful conduct on the part of the insurer. Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. 355, 359–60, 708 n.e.2d 639, 642–43 (1999). according to the court:“the entitlement of an insured to attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in establishing contested coverage depends exclusively on whether or not that coverage is ultimately determined to exist. it does not depend on whether the denial of coverage by the insurer was reasonable or unreasonable, justified or unjustified, a close question of fact or a matter not even subject to legitimate dispute. the focus is exclusively on the bottom line.”Rubenstein v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am., 429 Mass. at 360, 708 n.e.2d at 643 (quoting Commercial Union Ins. Co. v. Porter Hayden Co., 698 a.2d 1167, 1219 (Md.ct.spec.app. 1997)).

28




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

in Hanover Insurance Co. v. Golden, 436 Mass. 584 (2002), the supreme Judicial court made clear that the fee-shifting principle of Gamache and Rubenstein applies not only where the insurer announces withdrawal from the third-party action and sues for a declaration (as in Gamache) or refuses to defend, forcing the insured to sue to establish the insurer’s duty to defend (as in Rubenstein), but also where the insurer brings a declaratory action and provisionally maintains defense of the third-party action pending instruction by the declaration. Hanover Ins. Co. v. Golden, 436 Mass. at 586–88. the fee-shifting rule thus applies in any situation in which the insured must incur attorney fees to secure or maintain a defense. Hanover Ins. Co. v. Golden, 436 Mass. at 588; see also Western World Ins. Co. v. Meridian Builders, 23 Mass.l.rptr. 365, *3 (Mass. super. 2007) (insured entitled to fees for prevailing on insurer’s premature declaratory judgment action). although an insured’s entitlement to attorneys’ fees for establishing the duty to defend is well-established, the related question of whether an insured could recover fees for establishing an insurer’s duty to indemnify long remained open. this changed with the supreme Judicial court’s decision in Wilkinson v. Citation Ins. Co., 447 Mass. 663, 674-76, 856 n.e.2d 829, 838-39 (2006), which declined to extend the Gamache fee-shifting rule where an insured successfully establishes a duty to indemnify. § 1.2.2  The Duty to “Indemnify”the two fundamental insurer obligations under a cgl policy are commonly referred  to as the duty to defend and the duty to “indemnify.” the latter designation may be a bit of a misnomer to the extent that an “indemnity” obligation is understood to be an obligation merely to reimburse the insured for amounts the insured has already paid. the promise of the cgl insurer is to “pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages.” thus, the policy contemplates that the insurer’s obligation will be triggered when the insured’s legal obligation to pay damages is established, and that the insurer will then make the payment on the insured’s behalf, such that the insured is never “out of pocket.” this can be a very important benefit, particularly where the damage award is of sufficient magnitude to threaten the insured’s solvency.under Massachusetts law, this result would obtain in the case of cgl policies (with respect to coverage for bodily injury or property damage) even if the policy language did not so provide. section 112 of g.l. c. 175 provides, in pertinent part:

29




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

the liability of [an insurer]… under any… policy insuring against liability for loss or damage on account of bodily injury or death… or on account of damage to property, shall become absolute whenever the loss or damage for which the insured is responsible occurs, and the satisfaction by the insured of a final judgment for such loss or damage shall not be a condition precedent to the right or duty of the [insurer] to make payment on account of said loss or damage. no such contract of insurance shall be cancelled or annulled by any agreement between the [insurer] and the insured after the said insured has become responsible for such loss or damage, and any such cancellation or annulment shall be void.g.l. c. 175, § 112. this provision prevents either the insolvency of the insured or  any post-loss agreement between insurer and insured from absolving the insurer of  its obligation to satisfy a covered claim; it effectively confers on the injured party a beneficial interest in the policy. See Lorando v. Gethro, 228 Mass. 181, 187, 117 n.e. 185, 188 (1917); Mayer v. Medical Malpractice Joint Underwriting Ass’n, 40 Mass.app.ct. 266, 272–73, 663 n.e.2d 274, 278 (1996); see also g.l. c. 175, § 113 (authorizing action to reach and apply proceeds of liability policy to satisfy judgment against insured).as noted in the discussion of the duty to defend, the duty to indemnify is determined by reference not to allegations but to “facts.” the scope of the duty to indemnify is said to be narrower than the scope of the duty to defend, because one is no longer interested in the various sets of facts the claimant might prove (consistent with his or her allegations); the inquiry now is into the single set of facts the claimant did prove. in practice, however, the coverage question cannot always be answered by reference 

“ …one is no longer interested in the various sets of facts the claimant might prove (consistent with his or her allegations); the inquiry now is into the single set of facts the claimant did prove.”

30




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

to findings of fact or a jury verdict from the underlying case. the underlying case  may settle, of course, in which case no “facts” will have been established. even if the underlying case is fully litigated, the coverage question may turn on facts that are not determined in the underlying action because they are not germane to the insured’s liability. Much of the law concerning determination of the indemnity obligation addresses this problem.(a) The “Facts” for Purposes of Indemnityit is a fundamental principle of indemnity that the indemnitor (here, the insurer) is “bound by the result of the trial [of the underlying case], as to all matters decided in that action that bear on the coverage issue.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. 747, 763 n.20, 610 n.e.2d 912, 921 n.20 (citing Miller v. United States Fidelity & Guar. Co., 291 Mass. 445, 448–49, 197 n.e. 75, 77–78 (1935)). thus,  for purposes of the indemnity obligation, the “facts” are those determined in the underlying action; neither insurer nor policyholder is free to claim in the coverage action that the “true” facts are different and to avoid or secure coverage on that basis. See Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. at 763 n.20, 610 n.e.2d at 921 n.20. as the supreme Judicial court further commented in Polaroid, “[w]hen the underlying claim is settled, the circumstances of the underlying claim are not aired in an adversary proceeding, and, therefore, a different approach may be required.” Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 Mass. at 763 n.20, 610 n.e.2d at 921 n.20. the court has not had occasion to date to spell out what that “different approach” would entail.courts of at least a few other jurisdictions have considered this question. One case that contains a fairly comprehensive treatment of the issue is United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d 1226, 1243–44 (ill.app.ct. 1994). the Gypsum case arose out of claims against united states gypsum company (“gypsum”) for property damage resulting from the installation of asbestos-containing acoustical finishing plasters in public and other buildings. gypsum’s liability insurers refused to cover these claims, and gypsum filed suit. the case went to trial on the insurers’ duty to indemnify gypsum with respect to eight underlying cases, one of which gypsum tried to an adverse verdict and seven of which gypsum had settled. United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 1229–30, 1232. the trial court  ruled that to determine whether gypsum would be entitled to indemnification, it would consider “whether the jury [in the tried case] either found, or u.s. gypsum reasonably believed the jury would be likely to find [in the settled cases], that u.s. gypsum’s asbestos containing materials caused tortious property damage to the underlying plaintiffs’ property.” United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 

31




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

1236. after examining evidence adduced in the tried case and developed in  discovery in the settled cases, the trial court concluded that “gypsum proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the underlying cases each involved allegations  of and evidence from underlying claimants of actual physical damage caused by its products to other property, the building and building contents.” United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 1236.the insurers appealed, arguing, inter alia, that gypsum was required to offer “actual facts” showing that property damage was present in each of the underlying cases. United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d 1226, 1241–42 (ill.app.ct. 1994). the court dismissed the notion that gypsum could be required to prove “actual property damage” in the case that had been tried, stating:gypsum[,] as an insured in a declaratory judgment action, does not have to prove de novo the existence of damage in the underlying action, i.e., its own liability. the adverse verdict returned by the jury and subsequent entry of judgment conclusively established gypsum’s liability with respect to the [tried] case.… the challenge by the insurers in a coverage action may therefore not address the issue as to whether the underlying plaintiffs sustained damage for which the insured is liable. that was the subject of the underlying action.… the determination to be made in a coverage action which proceeds after the insured’s liability has been conclusively determined by the underlying action is whether the type of injury claimed is within the policies’ ambit of coverage, not whether any damage occurred in the underlying action… “a policyholder, therefore, does not have to prove its actual liability as a prerequisite to obtaining coverage.”United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 1242–43 (emphasis added) (quoting Dayton Indep. Sch. Dist. v. National Gypsum Co., 682 f.supp. 1403, 1406 (e.d.tex. 1988).the Gypsum court also held that proof of “actual facts” was not required with respect to the cases gypsum settled. the court was concerned that, otherwise, “an insured will be deterred from entering into a settlement agreement when it would have to offer full proof that property damage existed in the coverage action when that proof has not yet been established in the underlying action.” United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d 1226, 1244 (ill.app.ct. 1994). the court recognized 

32




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

also that if proof of actual property damage is required, “‘settling defendants [would be placed] in the hopelessly untenable position of having to refute liability in the underlying action until the moment of settlement, and then turn about face to prove liability in the insurance action.’” United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 1244 (quoting Uniroyal, Inc. v. Home Ins. Co., 707 f.supp. 1368, 1378 (e.d.n.y. 1988)). the court concluded that the task in the coverage action is to review “the evidence from the underlying cases [to determine]… whether [the insured] had a reasonable anticipation of liability in the cases which it settled and whether the damage was the type of damage covered by the policy.” United States Gypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 n.e.2d at 1244.the Gypsum case strikes an appropriate balance between the right of the policyholder to settle cases without conceding liability and the right of the insurer to contest coverage based on a view of the facts not inconsistent with the evidence the claimant would have adduced had the underlying claim gone to trial. because the version of the facts proved by the claimant will control if the claim does go to trial, what should matter in the case of a settlement is what the claimant would have sought to prove had the case not settled. in other words, if the policyholder’s settlement is reasonable, the insurer should not be free to avoid coverage by seeking to prove a set of facts materially at variance with the case the claimant sought to make. it seems reasonable to expect the Massachusetts courts, building on the foundation set in Polaroid, ultimately to embrace such a view. Cf. Liquor Liab. Joint Underwriting Ass’n v. Hermitage Ins. Co., 419 Mass. 316, 323–24, 644 n.e.2d 964, 968–69 (1995) (case settled after jury verdict; verdict did not differentiate between counts covered by different insurers; held, under Polaroid, defense breaching insurer had burden to allocate settlement but would not be permitted to attempt to do so due to general verdict).(b) Limits of Liability; Insurer Responsibility for Interest and Coststhe scope of the insurer’s indemnity obligation is determined by reference to the insuring agreements, definitions and exclusions of the policy applied to the facts of the third-party claim, determined in accordance with the principles discussed in the preceding section. the magnitude of the insurer’s indemnity obligation is measured by the amount of the claimant’s recovery and limited by the limits of liability stated in the “declarations” of the policy. standard cgl policies may contain several types of limits, including so-called “per occurrence” and “aggregate” limits, that can operate in various ways, depending on when the policy was written and whether it was written on a standard form. 

33




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

generally, a “per occurrence” limit sets the maximum amount the insurer will  be obligated to pay for all damages arising out of one event or resulting from substantially the same injurious exposure. in the case of “bodily injury” and “property damage” liability, the present standard form “per occurrence” limit applies, regardless of the number of insureds or claims made, or persons or organizations making the claims, although policies issued before 1973 may impose a separate “per person” limit for “bodily injury” liability. the policy may have separate “per occurrence” limits for “bodily injury” and “property damage” claims, or it may provide a “combined single limit” for all liability arising out of a single “occurrence.” limits for “personal or advertising injury” may operate on a “per occurrence” basis or, as in the present standard form, by reference to the number of persons or organizations suffering  such injury as a result of an “offense” described in the policy definitions.an “aggregate” limit of liability is the most the insurer will pay during a designated term, regardless of the number of otherwise covered “occurrences” for which the insured is liable. the term is usually a 12-month period, with the aggregate limits  of multi-year policies renewing annually. it is important to note that many older cgl policies may contain no aggregate limit applicable to certain kinds of liabilities. for example, standard cgl polices written before 1986 imposed an aggregate limit  with respect to “bodily injury” liability, but only if it arose from the “products hazard” or the “completed operations hazard”—that is, the products liability or liability associated with finished work, as of a construction contractor. standard form cgl policies issued before 1966 would also set forth separate aggregate limits for several different kinds of “property damage” liabilities.limits of liability provisions tend to refer to the amount of “damages” the insurer  will pay. the issue has arisen whether the term “damages” does or does not include prejudgment interest incorporated into an award. in Mayer v. Medical Malpractice Joint Underwriting Ass’n, 40 Mass.app.ct. 266, 633 n.e.2d 274 (1996), an appeals court panel held that the term “damages” does encompass prejudgment interest, such that the policy limit applies, capping insurer liability for the entire award (damages and prejudgment interest) at the policy limit. Mayer v. Medical Malpractice Joint Underwriting Ass’n, 40 Mass.app.ct. at 270–71, 633 n.e.2d at 277–78 (citing Factory Mut. Liab. Ins. Co. v. Cooper, 262 a.2d 370 (r.i. 1970)). importantly, the policy before the court made no express reference to prejudgment interest, although it did provide, in a “supplementary Payments” provision, for insurer payment of postjudgment interest in addition to the limit of liability. Mayer v. Medical Malpractice Joint Underwriting Ass’n, 40 Mass.app.ct. at 271, 663 n.e.2d at 278.

the Mayer decision should not be taken as establishing that a liability insurer never will be responsible to pay prejudgment interest in excess of the policy limit. indeed, since 1986, the standard cgl policy (in the “supplementary Payments” section)  has expressly provided coverage, over and above the policy limit, for “[p]rejudgment interest awarded against the insured on that part of the judgment [the insurer] pay[s],” provided that if the insurer offers to contribute the full policy limit to a settlement,  it will not pay prejudgment interest for the time between the offer and the judgment. this approach acknowledges the potential effect of the insurer’s handling of the defense on the exposure to prejudgment interest, while limiting the insurer’s contractual obligation to amounts attributable to its coverage layer and to settlement decisions that are within its control.Moreover, as discussed in § 1.2.3 below, an insurer may be liable to its policyholder for a negligent failure to settle a claim for an amount falling within the policy limit, and the damages awarded can include prejudgment interest the policyholder must pay because of the insurer’s breach of its duty to settle. See Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. 115, 118–21, 628 n.e.2d 14, 16–18 (1994) (discussing the relationship between an insurer’s contract-based duty to settle and the g.l. c. 93a “bad faith” standard); DiMarzo v. American Mut. Ins. Co., 389 Mass. 85, 89, 92, 101, 449 n.e.2d 1189, 1193, 1195, 1199 (1983) (prejudgment interest included in failure-to-settle damages awarded under g.l. c. 93a, § 9). the Mayer decision did not purport to disturb this state of affairs.the “supplementary Payments” provision of the current standard cgl form imposes additional extra-limits obligations, beyond payment of prejudgment interest. under this clause, the insurer must pay, for example, costs incurred to acquire a bond to release a real estate attachment, expenses incurred by the insured to assist the insurer in the investigation or defense of the claim and court costs taxed against the insured. the “supplementary Payments” provision also requires the insurer to pay postjudgment interest that accrues on the full amount of any judgment before the insurer has paid, offered to pay or deposited in court the part of the judgment that is within the applicable limit of liability. accordingly, under the current standard form (and most earlier versions), if an insurer insists on an appeal from an adverse judgment, it will bear the risk, regardless of its policy limit, that an unsuccessful appeal will result in substantial postjudgment interest.


§ 1.2.3  The Duties to Investigate and to Settleunder the cgl policy, the insurer promises to defend any suit alleging a liability potentially within the policy coverage and to indemnify the insured for damages  it must pay for a claim that is, in fact, covered. in the same insuring agreement, through language that has changed little over the past six decades, the insurer also reserves for itself the prerogative to “‘make such investigation, negotiation and settlement of any claim or suit as it deems expedient.’” Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co., 339 Mass. 184, 186, 158 n.e.2d 338, 340 (1959) (quoting the policy). it has been recognized, however, that an insurer’s failure to exercise this prerogative with proper regard for the insured’s interests can result in undue prejudice to the insured. See, e.g., Abrams v. Factory Mut. Liab. Ins. Co., 298 Mass. 141, 145, 10 n.e.2d 82, 84 (1937). accordingly, the supreme Judicial court has stated that the insurer’s reservation of a privilege to control investigation and settlement of claims “imports a reciprocal obligation for its exercise”—i.e., an obligation to investigate and settle claims in satisfaction of its implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co., 339 Mass. 184, 186–87, 158 n.e.2d 338, 340–41 (1959).the classic formulation of the duty to settle is found in the Murach decision, where the court stated that “[t]o mitigate the danger…that the insurer will favor its own interest to the exclusion of the insured’s, good faith requires that it make the decision (whether to settle a claim within the limits of the policy or to try the case) as it would if no policy limit were applicable to the claim.” Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co., 339 Mass. 184, 187, 158 n.e.2d 338, 341 (1959) (citing robert e. Keeton, Liability Insurance and Responsibility for Settlement, 67 harv.l.rev. 1136, 1148 (1954)). the corollary with respect to the duty to investigate is that “[g]ood 

“ …if an insurer insists on an appeal from an adverse judgment, it will bear the risk, regardless of its policy limit, that an unsuccessful appeal will result in substantial postjudgment interest.”


faith also requires that [the insurer] exercise common prudence to discover the facts as to liability and damages upon which an intelligent decision [whether to settle] may be based.” Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co., 339 Mass. at 187, 158 n.e.2d at 341.although often paired, the duties to investigate and settle deserve separate analysis, as a breach of one does not invariably involve a breach of the other. although a precise formulation of the duty to investigate may remain elusive, it is clear that an insurer must conduct some independent investigation before denying coverage, and  a failure to do so may constitute an unfair claim settlement practice, actionable under chapter 93a. in Federal Ins. Co. v. HPSC, Inc., 480 f.3d 26, 35-36 (1st cir. 2007), for example, the first circuit held an insurer in breach of its duty to investigate (in violation of chapter 93a) where the claims examiner performed “no investigation of the available facts before denying coverage,” but instead based her coverage determination solely on materials submitted with the claim. evidently, the insured could have recovered on the basis of this breach alone, even if the court had not also held the insurer in breach of its duty to settle. by the same token, even if an insurer conducts an adequate investigation, it may be liable under contract for unreasonably failing to settle a claim for a sum within the policy limits. Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co., 339 Mass. 184, 187, 158 n.e.2d 338, 341 (1959). in addition, at least in the case of “consumers,” an insurer’s failure “to effectuate prompt, fair and equitable settlements of claims in which liability has become reasonably clear” (in violation of g.l. c. 176d, § 3(9)(f)) may yield liability under g.l. c. 93a, § 9, potentially resulting in multiple damages and attorney fees. See, e.g., Federal Ins. Co. v. HPSC, Inc., 480 f.3d at 36; DiMarzo v. American Mut. Ins. Co., 389 Mass. 85, 93–102, 449 n.e.2d 1189, 1195–1200 (1983). until 1994, however, it was unclear whether an insurer could incur common law tort liability for a failure to settle, albeit tort liability for negligence in the conduct of the defense has long been recognized. See Abrams v. Factory Mut. Liab. Ins. Co., 298 Mass. 141, 144, 10 n.e.2d 82, 84 (1937) (“although the duty [to defend] arises out of the contract and is measured by its terms, negligence in the manner of performing that duty as distinguished from mere failure to perform it, causing damage, is a tort.”). this issue—which may be important at least to policyholder businesses ineligible to sue under section 9 of chapter 93a—was resolved by the supreme Judicial court in Hartford Casualty Insurance Co. v. New Hampshire Insurance Co., 417 Mass. 115, 628 n.e.2d 14 (1994).in the Hartford Casualty case, a primary carrier with a $500,000 policy limit (new hampshire insurance) refused to settle a claim that then went to trial, resulting in  

37




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

a verdict requiring an excess carrier (hartford casualty) to pay $1.5 million to satisfy the judgment in excess of the primary coverage. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. 115, 116, 628 n.e.2d 14, 14 (1994). hartford casualty, subrogated to its insured’s rights, sued new hampshire insurance,  arguing that new hampshire insurance was liable for the excess payment because it improperly failed to settle the claim within the limits of the primary coverage. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 116, 628 n.e.2d at 14. hartford casualty’s tort claim for negligence and its contract claim under Murach were tried to a jury, which found for new hampshire insurance on both theories. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 116–17, 628 n.e.2d at 14–16. hartford casualty appealed, claiming error principally in the judge’s instructions on the contract count. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 117, 628 n.e.2d at 16.the supreme Judicial court declined to reach hartford casualty’s claims of error in the jury instructions, because the jury, on substantially unchallenged instructions, found that new hampshire insurance was not negligent. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v.  New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. 115, 117, 628 n.e.2d 14, 16 (1994). the court reasoned that, if a negligence claim would lie, then the jury’s finding that new hampshire insurance was not negligent would render any error in the instructions  on the contract claim harmless, because the standard for “objective” bad faith is the same as, or less strict than, a negligence standard, and there was no claim of “subjective” bad faith (i.e., improper motive) on new hampshire insurance’s part. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 121, 628 n.e.2d  at 18. in holding that a negligence claim will lie, the court observed that the national trend was to apply a negligence standard and that such a standard would differ little from the good faith test that had evolved in Massachusetts. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 121, 628 n.e.2d at 18.by the same token, the court reiterated that it will not suffice to show that the insurer failed to settle when a reasonably prudent insurer, exercising due care, would have done so. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. 115, 121, 628 n.e.2d 14, 18 (1994). the required showing, instead, is that “no reasonable insurer would have failed to settle the case within the policy limits.” Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 121, 628 n.e.2d at 18 (emphasis added). the court explained as follows:this test requires the insured… to prove that the plaintiff in the underlying action would have settled the claim within the policy limits and that, assuming the insurer’s unlimited exposure (that is, viewing 

the question from the point of view of the insured), no reasonable insurer would have refused the settlement offer or would have refused to respond to the offer.Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass. at 121, 628 n.e.2d at 18. accordingly, while the Hartford case makes clear that a tort action for negligence may lie against an insurer for breach of the duty to settle, and thus that the broader range of damages available in tort cases will be in play, the standard for insurer negligence will be particularly exacting and “not significantly different” from a bad faith standard. See Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. New Hampshire Ins. Co., 417 Mass.  at 121, 628 n.e.2d at 18.since Hartford Casualty, a policyholder prejudiced by a cgl carrier’s failure to settle within the policy limits may assert both contract and tort claims and may also have claims under g.l. c. 93a, § 9 and g.l. c. 176d, § 3(9), in the case of consumers, or g.l. c. 93a, § 11, in the case of businesses. See Kiewit Constr. Co. v. Westchester Fire Ins. Co., 878 f.supp. 298, 302 (d.Mass. 1995) (“to say… that section 11 of 93a does not incorporate 176d is not to say that conduct that happens to violate 176d may never be ‘unfair or deceptive’ within the meaning of section 2 of 93a, and, thus, actionable under section 11.”). despite the variety of theories available, however, the claim often will be difficult to prove. the problems of proof these claims can present are illustrated by Judge Keeton’s decision in RLI Insurance Co. v. General Star Indemnity Co., 997 f.supp. 140 (d.Mass. 1998).in RLI Insurance Co. v. General Star Indemnity Co., an umbrella carrier (rli) contended that the failure of a primary carrier (general star) to more promptly investigate and resolve a tort action for a sum within its policy limit resulted in an acrimonious relationship with the claimants and the need, ultimately, to settle the case for $1 million in excess of the $1 million primary limit. RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. 140, 142–43 (d.Mass. 1998). in a discussion showing the importance of the duty to investigate that accompanies the duty to settle, the court found general star’s performance in the handling of the claim deficient due  to its “failure to recognize, promptly after it received notice of the injury, that the… claim required intensive and early attention to establishing a favorable relationship among general star, its insured, and the [claimants] (or their attorney if they were already represented by counsel).” RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. at 147. in making this finding, the court observed as follows:

the liability insurer’s duties and rights are not confined to aggressive defense; they extend as well to responsibility for reasonably prompt and reasonably effective investigation that will enable the insurer to have an adequate basis for making a decision about settlement, even if that decision itself is to be judged by a good faith rather than a negligence standard.RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. at 147. in effect, the court found, consistent with rli’s contention, that general star had failed to adequately explore the prospects for a favorable early settlement opportunity.general star argued that notwithstanding its deficient performance, rli was not entitled to recover, because the claimants never offered to settle the case for a  sum within the general star limit. RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. 140, 149–50 (d.Mass. 1998). the court rejected this contention, believing it to be a natural extension of the supreme Judicial court’s precedents to find a breach of the duty to settle where the primary carrier “could have settled within its policy limit had its ‘handling’ of the claim measured up to the prescribed standard of performance in investigation and other steps that would have enabled it to decide at a relatively early date that the claim was one as to which ‘liability has become reasonably clear.’” RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. at 149–50 (quoting g.l. c. 176d, § 3(9)(f)). nevertheless, the court concluded that rli was not entitled to recover because, by the time general star ought to have concluded that liability was reasonably clear, the claimants were sufficiently educated about the value of the claim that they would not have accepted the $1 million general star had to offer. RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. at 150. the court was careful to note that rli had not argued that general star’s conduct caused the “loss of an opportunity to settle sooner or at a lower figure above the primary insurer’s limits.” RLI Ins. Co. v. General Star Indem. Co., 997 f.supp. at 151.cases such as RLI seem to uncover a paradox that severely limits insurer accountability for settlement decisions made without proper regard for the insured’s interests: if the failure to settle is actionable only where no reasonable insurer would have failed to offer its policy limit, then, for liability to attach, presumably the magnitude of the likely liability must be very clearly sufficient to consume the policy limit—otherwise, reasonable minds might differ and the heightened negligence standard will not be reached. Where the exposure is clearly sufficient to consume  the limit, however, a payment just equal to that limit, standing alone, rarely will be sufficient to settle the claim.

this problem may one day lead to a reassessment of the heightened negligence standard adopted in Hartford Casualty, or, more likely, the Massachusetts courts may recognize the validity of claims that a failure by the primary carrier to offer its policy limit caused the loss of an opportunity to settle at a lower figure above that limit. in any event, counsel responsible for protecting the interests of the insured should be vigilant in valuing the case and sharing that valuation—and the supporting analysis—with all parties whose funds may be needed to effect a settlement, including primary and excess carriers. an insurer that has such an evaluation in its file may be less likely to find a safe harbor in the vagaries of the heightened standard.§ 1.3  Obligations of the Policyholderthe insurance bargain is the transfer of a risk of loss to the insurer in exchange for the payment of premiums by the insured. the chief obligation of the purchaser of insurance, therefore, is to pay premiums when due. Other obligations of the insured under a liability policy arise in two contexts: underwriting and claims handling. in the underwriting process, the obligation of the applicant for insurance is to answer truthfully and completely all questions put by the underwriter, at least where the questions are drafted with reasonable particularity. in this way, the underwriter is  put in a position to make an informed decision as to whether to issue the policy and, if a policy is to be issued, to fix an appropriate premium.the obligations of the insured in the claims-handling context are varied, but most are directed to one objective: placing the insurer in an optimal position to determine its coverage obligations and perform those obligations (e.g., to investigate and defend or settle covered claims). thus, among the requirements that the policy imposes on the insured are the following:“ Cases such as RLI seem to uncover a paradox that severely limits insurer accountability for settlement decisions made without proper regard for the insured’s interests…”

•  to notify the insurer of events or conditions (i.e., “occurrences”) that may give  rise to claims;•  to advise the insurer if a claim or suit in fact is brought; and•  to cooperate with the insurer in its investigation and handling of the defense. two additional claims-related policyholder obligations—the duty to mitigate damages and the duty to preserve insurer subrogation rights—help the insurer contain or spread the loss.as the focus of this ebook is on claims-related obligations of insurer and insured,  the discussion that follows will not address issues related to premium payment, but  it will at least touch on all of the referenced policyholder duties that arise in the context of claims. in addition, since alleged breaches of the insured’s underwriting disclosure obligations tend to be raised in the context of claims—in the guise of a misrepresentation coverage defense—those obligations will also be discussed. the natural starting point is at the outset of the insurance relationship, with the (prospective) insured’s disclosure obligations.§ 1.3.1   The Policy Application and the Insured’s  Disclosure Obligationsin insurance contracts, as with any contract, each party is entitled to rely on the other’s warranties and representations and may be excused from performance if induced to enter into the contract by means of the other party’s false warranty or representation as to a material matter. although, in principle, both parties are obliged to avoid misrepresentations in the course of negotiation of the policy, as a practical matter, the burden of disclosure falls mainly on the applicant (or prospective insured), largely because of its superior knowledge regarding the risk to be insured. therefore, in Massachusetts, as elsewhere, the case law concerning misrepresentation in the policy placement process is dominated by instances in which insurers have sought to avoid coverage on the basis of an alleged misrepresentation by the insured in the policy application.Much of the early case law in Massachusetts was concerned with the nice distinction between “warranties” and “representations.” See, e.g., Daniels v. Hudson River Fire Ins. Co., 66 Mass. (12 cush.) 416, 424 (1853). the consequences of making a false warranty apparently were dire indeed:

if any statement of fact, however unimportant it may have been regarded by both parties to the contract, is a warranty, and it happens to be untrue, it avoids the policy; if it be construed a representation, and is untrue, it does not avoid the contract if not wilful, or if not material.See Daniels v. Hudson River Fire Ins. Co., 66 Mass. (12 cush.) at 424. Often,  the difficulty was in determining whether the statement was a warranty or a representation. See Daniels v. Hudson River Fire Ins. Co., 66 Mass. (12 cush.) at 423–26 (discussing rule that “a warranty must be embraced in the policy itself”  and various circumstances in which this will, or will not, be deemed to be the case).this problem was laid to rest with the legislature’s enactment of a statute on the subject, now codified at g.l. c. 175 § 186. section 186 provides:no oral or written misrepresentation or warranty made in the negotiation of a policy of insurance by the insured or in his behalf  shall be deemed material or defeat or avoid the policy or prevent its attaching unless such misrepresentation or warranty is made with actual intent to deceive, or unless the matter misrepresented or made a warranty increased the risk of loss.g.l. c. 175, § 186.in effect, section 186 stripped “warranties” of their special status and made all  of the insured’s statements of fact subject to the rules formerly applicable only to “representations.” Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Burno, 309 Mass. 7, 11, 33 n.e.2d 519, 520 (1941). Of course, misrepresentation doctrine is not concerned exclusively with false statements of fact but also with “concealment.” in this context, “concealment” has a very specific meaning. in the words of the Daniels court:“concealment” is the designed and intentional withholding of any fact material to the risk, which the assured, in honesty and good faith, ought to communicate to the underwriter; mere silence on the part of the assured, especially as to some matter of fact which he does not consider it important for the underwriter to know, is not to be considered such a concealment.Daniels v. Hudson River Fire Ins. Co., 66 Mass. (12 cush.) 416, 425 (1853). accordingly, mere nondisclosure of a fact will not enable the insurer to avoid coverage unless the insured, as applicant, was chargeable with a “designed and intentional” withholding of information.

nevertheless, insurers have contended that the insured’s failure to disclose a material fact will void the policy, even where the insurer has made no inquiry specifically seeking the information in question, so long as the “reasonable insured” would have believed the fact to be something the insurer would deem material. See, e.g., barry r. Ostrager & thomas r. newman, Handbook on Insurance Coverage Disputes § 3.01[b], at 86 (aspen law & business 9th ed. 1998) (citing Christiana Gen. Ins. Corp. v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 979 f.2d 268 (2d cir. 1992)). this argument typically is accompanied by citations to cases from the reinsurance context, in which a duty to disclose, even absent specific inquiry, is said to arise from the special relationship  of “utmost good faith” (uberrimæ fidei) between reinsurer and reinsured. See, e.g., Christiana Gen. Ins. Corp. v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 979 f.2d at 278–80 (applying doctrine in reinsurance dispute, but rejecting misrepresentation claim for failure to allege that reinsured in fact knew that reinsurer would consider information material).Whatever the vitality of the “utmost good faith” doctrine in other jurisdictions, it is not the law of Massachusetts in the direct insurance context. beyond the statement in Daniels that the withholding of information must be “designed and intentional” (clearly a subjective test),the argument seems to be foreclosed by the supreme Judicial court’s decision in Washington Mills Emery Manufacturing Co. v. Weymouth & Braintree Mutual Fire Insurance Co., 135 Mass. 503 (1883). in Washington Mills, the defendant insurer had issued two successive fire insurance policies to the plaintiff. the property insured was certain buildings on a parcel of land the policyholder owned at the time the first policy was issued. before the second policy was issued, the insured conveyed the land, but not the buildings, to the city of boston, agreeing to remove the buildings and contents before a date certain and stipulating that, if the buildings were not removed by that date, they would then become the city’s property. the buildings were consumed in a fire before the removal deadline had arrived. Washington Mills Emery Mfg. Co. v. Weymouth & Braintree Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 135 Mass. at 504–05.“ …insurers have contended that the insured’s failure to disclose a material fact will void the policy, even where the insurer has made no inquiry specifically seeking the information in question, so long as the “reasonable insured” would have believed the fact to be something the insurer would deem material.”

the insurer sought to avoid coverage on the ground of misrepresentation. the court rejected this contention, explaining as follows:the plaintiff made no misrepresentations and no concealment as to its title. the policy is upon the buildings. the defendant saw fit to issue this policy without any specific inquiries of the plaintiff as to the title to the land, and without any representations by the plaintiff on this point. it was its own carelessness, and it cannot avoid the policy without proving intentional misrepresentation or concealment on the part of the plaintiff. an innocent failure to communicate facts about which the plaintiff was not asked will not have this effect.Washington Mills Emery Mfg. Co. v. Weymouth & Braintree Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 135 Mass. 503, 505 (1883). in theory at least, a concealment defense may lie even absent a specific application question if it can be proved that the applicant deliberately withheld information he or she, in fact, knew to be important to the underwriter. See Hanover Ins. Co. v. Leeds, 42 Mass.app.ct. 54, 57, 674 n.e.2d 1091, 1094 (1997) (burden to prove misrepresentation defense is on insurer). Otherwise, however, the applicant will not be at risk of forfeiting coverage for failing to divine what the insurer would like to know but has not asked. as recently stated in the renewal context in Quincy Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Quisset Properties, Inc., 69 Mass.app.ct. 147, 154-55, 866 n.e.2d 966, 971 (2007), “the onus is on the insurer to indentify the information that it considers material and request from the insured updated information concerning any changes… absent such [a] request, the insured’s silence is not a misrepresentation…” Where an insurer makes a request for information, determining whether or not the insured‘s response constitutes a misrepresentation begins, of course, with analysis  of the question asked. Just as with ambiguous policy terms, ambiguous underwriting questions are construed in the policyholder’s favor. accordingly, where an insurer’s request for information “lends itself to more than one reasonable interpretation, an honest answer to one of those reasonable interpretations cannot be labeled a misrepresentation.” Hingham Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Mercurio, 71 Mass.app.ct. 21, 24, 878 n.e.2d 946, 949 (2008).an allied question of increasing importance is when an insurance purchaser must disclose circumstances that may give rise to claims in the future. in TIG Insurance Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. 683 (2002), a case involving professional liability insurance, an insurer sought to rescind a policy based on the policyholder’s response to an application question asking whether the applicant had “a reasonable basis to 

foresee” that a claim would be made, regardless of the validity of the claim. TIG Ins. Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. at 684. the policyholder answered this question in the negative, despite the fact that, prior to filling out the application, he had received a letter stating that he was a potential target for legal action. TIG Ins. Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. at 685–86. the policyholder contended that he thought the letter contemplated only a suit for securities-law violations, rather than a claim of professional negligence. TIG Ins. Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. at 688. the court affirmed the rescission of the policy, holding that, while the inquiry focused on the policyholder’s subjective knowledge, the policy called for an objective inquiry into “what a reasonable attorney would foresee given [such] knowledge.” TIG Ins. Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. at 688. While the court tied this analysis firmly to the policy language, it seems reasonable to expect that a similar test would be applied unless the policy clearly called only for the applicant’s actual subjective expectations.indeed, in Chicago Insurance Co. v. Lappin, 58 Mass.app.ct. 769 (2003), the court applied the “objective-subjective approach” of Blacker in considering a policy application that asked whether the applicant was aware of “circumstances which  may result in a claim.” Chicago Ins. Co. v. Lappin, 58 Mass.app.ct. at 778. there, the court refused to disturb the trial judge’s conclusion that, despite the existence  of certain “warning signs,” the attorney-applicant did not have sufficient knowledge concerning an embezzlement scheme undertaken by an administrative assistant that he should have identified the “warning signs” in response to the quoted question. Chicago Ins. Co. v. Lappin, 58 Mass.app.ct. at 778. While the insurer contended  that the “warning signs” placed the attorney on “inquiry notice,” such that he could  be charged with knowledge of all those matters a reasonably diligent inquiry would develop, the court refused to impute such knowledge to the attorney as a matter of law. Chicago Ins. Co. v. Lappin, 58 Mass.app.ct. at 779. rather, it observed that “[w]hether notice is sufficient constructively to charge one with specific knowledge is a question ordinarily reserved to the fact finder.” Chicago Ins. Co. v. Lappin, 58 Mass.app.ct. at 779.assuming that a misrepresentation has been shown, it will excuse the insurer’s performance only if it was made with “actual intent to deceive” or if it “increased the risk of loss.” See Barnstable County Ins. Co. v. Gale, 425 Mass. 126, 127–28, 680 n.e.2d 42, 43–44 (1997). for purposes of section 186, “[a] fact ‘must be regarded as material, the knowledge or ignorance of which would naturally influence the judgment of the underwriter in making the contract at all, or in estimating the degree and character of the risk, or in fixing the rate of the premium.’” Employers’ Liab. Assurance Corp. v. Vella, 366 Mass. 651, 655, 321 n.e.2d 910, 913 (1975) 

(quoting Daniels v. Hudson River Fire Ins. Co., 66 Mass. (12 cush.) 416, 425 (1853)). the supreme Judicial court has made clear that a misstatement of fact or a failure to disclose requested information will be deemed material if disclosure would have resulted in a higher premium, irrespective of any after-the-fact argument by the insured that the actual risk of loss was not increased. See Barnstable County Ins.  Co. v. Gale, 425 Mass. at 128–29, 680 n.e.2d at 44 (insured’s failure to disclose ownership of second automobile voided coverage where disclosure would have resulted in higher premium; insured’s use of only one vehicle at a time held irrelevant). furthermore, in Blacker, the court indicated in dicta that materiality sometimes  can be inferred, stating that “accurate information about an applicant’s exposure  to potential claims is so fundamental to claims-made underwriting, that a misrepresentation on this score may be said to increase the risk of loss as a matter of law, without proof of subjective reliance by the insurer.” TIG Ins. Co. v. Blacker, 54 Mass.app.ct. at 689.§ 1.3.2  The Notice Obligationin Massachusetts, there are two quite distinct lines of authority dealing with the insured’s duty to notify the insurer in the event of a potentially covered “occurrence” or of a claim or suit resulting from such an occurrence. One of these addresses the notice obligation under so-called “occurrence” basis policies—i.e., policies that are called into play, or “triggered,” if all or part of the “bodily injury” or “property damage” at issue took place during the policy period, or if the “offense” on which a “personal or advertising injury” claim is based took place during the policy period. the second line of authority addresses the notice obligation under so-called “claims-made” policies, an alternative form introduced broadly in 1986, under which the policy is triggered if the claim against the insured is made during the policy period or during an “extended reporting period.” the two forms, and the “late notice” cases decided under them, are discussed separately below.(a) Notice Under “Occurrence”-Basis Policiesexcept for language reflecting the 1986 incorporation of coverage for “personal  and advertising injury” liability into the cgl policy, the notice provision appearing  in the “occurrence” basis form has remained substantially the same for several decades. the insured’s notice duties are set forth in the current form at condition 2, entitled “duties in the event of Occurrence, Offense, claim or suit.” this condition contains two notice requirements: one calling for notice of any potentially covered “occurrence” (or, in the case of “personal and advertising injury” liability, any potentially covered “offense”), and a second requiring notice of any claim or suit 

arising from such an occurrence or offense. because most of the authorities discussing the notice question were decided under pre-1986 policies, the focus  here is on “occurrences” rather than “offenses,” but there should be little difference  in the treatment of these coverage-triggering events for notice purposes.the formulation of the notice provision in the 1973 cgl standard form states:(a) in the event of an occurrence, written notice containing  particulars sufficient to identify the insured and also reasonably obtainable information with respect to the time, place and circumstances thereof, and the names and addresses of the injured and of available witnesses, shall be given by or for the insured to the company or any of its authorized agents as soon as practicable.(b) if claim is made or suit is brought against the insured, the insured shall immediately forward to the company every demand, notice, summons, or other process received by him or his representatives.the cgl policy thus requires that a policyholder give the insurer notice of an occurrence as soon as practicable and notice of a claim or suit “immediately.” (it should be emphasized that this notice provision is found in primary liability policies; notice provisions in “occurrence”-basis excess and umbrella policies are tied to the insured’s assessment of whether the loss is of such magnitude as to exhaust underlying coverage, which calls for a different analysis. See Employers’ Liab. Assurance Corp. v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 43 Mass.app.ct. 465, 472–74, 684 n.e.2d 600, 605–07 (1997).The Common Law Rule: Strict Compliance; Excuses for Delay until the late 1970s, Massachusetts followed the so-called common law rule, holding that a failure of strict compliance with notice requirements results in a forfeiture of coverage, regardless of whether the untimeliness of the notice had any effect on the carrier’s ultimate exposure. See Spooner v. General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp., 379 Mass. 377, 378, 397 n.e.2d 1290, 1290 (1979). under this rule, virtually the only way an insured could escape forfeiture if notice was delayed was  to establish that giving more timely notice was “impracticable.” although most cases decided since the 1980s have dealt with notice obligations under the regime created by g.l. c. 175, § 112, which requires a showing of prejudice from late notice (see the section entitled, “g.l. c. 175, § 112: the Prejudice requirement,” below), the “practicability” issue remains pertinent because notice must first be shown to have been untimely before the prejudice issue is reached.

Many of the “practicability” disputes involved the question whether a delay in giving notice was excusable where the insured lacked knowledge that the occurrence could give rise to liability. the cases rejected this argument. See, e.g., Powell v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Cos., 26 Mass.app.ct. 508, 514–16, 529 n.e.2d 1228, 1231–32 (1988) (four month delay in providing notice untimely). as stated in a frequently cited opinion, “the fact [that] the [insured] has a reasonable and bona fide doubt as to the existence of any injury or of any liability…cannot be used to deprive the insurer of his contractual right to have an immediate notice of the occurrence of an accident, regardless of the damages that may be claimed to flow from that accident.” McCarthy v. Rendle, 230 Mass. 35, 39, 119 n.e. 188, 189 (1918); see Eastern Prods. Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 58 Mass.app.ct. 16, 22 (2003); Powell v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Cos., 26 Mass.app.ct. at 514, 529 n.e.2d at 1231; Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. Valley Manufactured Prods. Co., 765 f.supp. 1121 (d.Mass. 1991), aff’d per curiam, 960 f.2d 143 (1st cir. 1992).some excuses policyholders have advanced have fared better. the more recent cases interpret “as soon as practicable” to mean “within a reasonable time” and review all the circumstances in deciding whether notice is timely. See LaPointe v. Shelby Mut. Ins. Co., 361 Mass. 558, 565, 281 n.e.2d 253, 257 (1972) (conduct  of the insurer’s agent excused untimely notice); Ratner v. Canadian Universal Ins. Co., 359 Mass. 375, 383, 269 n.e.2d 227, 231 (1971) (vague policy terms excused untimely notice). Moreover, if the insured has no reason to believe that an occurrence in any way involves the insured, the notice obligation does not arise. See Leveille v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 353 Mass. 716, 719, 234 n.e.2d 761, 763 (1968).G.L. c. 175, § 112: The Prejudice Requirementin response to concerns over the harshness of the strict notice rule, the Massachusetts legislature passed legislation, effective October 16, 1977, requiring carriers issuing certain classes of liability insurance (including cgl) to demonstrate prejudice before disclaiming coverage on grounds of late notice. this statute, codified at g.l. c. 175, § 112, provides:an insurance company shall not deny insurance coverage to an insured because of failure of an insured to seasonably notify an insurance company of an occurrence, incident, claim or of a suit founded upon an occurrence, incident or claim, which may give rise to a liability insured against unless the insurance company has been prejudiced thereby.

g.l. c. 175, § 112 (as amended by 1977 Mass. acts 437).in Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Bowes, 381 Mass. 278, 409 n.e.2d 185 (1980), the supreme Judicial court extended the prejudice requirement to cases arising under liability insurance forms not covered by the statute. Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Bowes, 381 Mass. at 282, 409 n.e.2d at 187. accordingly, in cases governed either by the statute or by Johnson Controls, an insurer now must prove that its interests have been prejudiced in order to escape coverage for “late notice.” the supreme Judicial court has stated that to satisfy the prejudice requirement,  “the delay in notice must be accompanied by a showing of some other facts or circumstances (such as, for example, the loss of critical evidence or testimony  from material witnesses despite diligent good faith efforts on the part of the insurer to locate them) which demonstrates that the insurer’s interests have been actually harmed.” Darcy v. Hartford Ins. Co., 407 Mass. 481, 486, 554 n.e.2d 28, 31 (1990). While the length of delay is relevant in determining whether actual prejudice has been shown, it is only one factor in the analysis, and the insurer must point to some actual harm before coverage can be disclaimed. Darcy v. Hartford Ins. Co., 407 Mass. at 486, 554 n.e.2d at 31.the nature of the necessary showing was described by Justice Kaplan in Employers’ Liability Assurance Corp. v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 43 Mass.app.ct. 465, 684 n.e.2d 600 (1997), as follows:

“ While the length of delay is relevant in determining whether actual prejudice has been shown, it is only one factor in the analysis, and the insurer must point to some actual harm before coverage can be disclaimed.”

[the inquiry is into] what prejudice the insurer has incurred, and could not by its own actions reasonably avoid, in consequence of the late notice—any such prejudice having to relate to the insurer’s general object of defeating fraudulent, invalid, or exaggerated claims. and the prejudice shown, to relieve the insurer, must have been material and specific. the insurer is challenged to show that it suffered “actual prejudice,” not just a “possibility” of it; that there has been “actual harm” to its interests; that it has been relegated to a “substantially less favorable position than it would have been in had timely notice been provided.” further, the insurer has “the burden of identifying the precise manner in which its interests have suffered.”Employers’ Liab. Assurance Corp. v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 43 Mass.app.ct. at 476, 684 n.e.2d at 608 (quoting Darcy v. Hartford Ins. Co., 407 Mass. 481, 486–87, 554 n.e.2d 28, 31–32 (1990)). unavailability of information surrounding the events of the claim is one potential consequence of late notice that Massachusetts courts have found to constitute adequate prejudice to defeat coverage. in Eastern Products Corp. v. Continental Casualty Co., 58 Mass.app.ct. 16, 23 (2003), the insured operated a rubber-manufacturing business for several decades. during operations, several fires broke out on the business property, burning large volumes of rubber. the department of environmental Protection designated the property as a confirmed disposal site approximately seven years after the last fire on the property. the insured first notified its insurers a year and a half after the deP designation and the discontinuation of operations. the court found that between the time the insured’s duty to provide notice “as soon as practicable” had arisen and the time the insured actually provided notice, the insured’s president (who had the most knowledge about the fires) had died and the insured, in winding up its operations, had destroyed all of its correspondence and business records. the court found this to be sufficient prejudice to defeat coverage. Eastern Prods. Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 58 Mass.app.ct. at 23. under “occurrence”-basis cgl policies, then, the insured is not at risk of a technical forfeiture if its notice to the insurer is delayed; the insurer must show that the purpose of the notice clause was frustrated before coverage will be lost. Obviously, the best course for the policyholder is to comply with the letter of the clause and give the insurer prompt notice when it becomes aware of circumstances that could result in a lawsuit or liability. in cases in which notice is delayed, however, the prejudice issue ordinarily will be fact sensitive, and an insurer who is otherwise obliged to defend will be required to do so until the notice question is resolved. See generally Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. 295, 304–05, 636 n.e.2d 247, 252–53 

(1994) (insurer, having reserved right to disclaim coverage, cannot then “sit back and essentially do nothing,” but must investigate and defend claim until the question of coverage can be determined).(b) Notice Under Claims-Made Policiesa claims-made liability policy is called into play where the claim is made against the policyholder during the policy period. these policies usually also provide that a claim made during the policy period will be covered only if the injury or damage at issue did not occur before a “retroactive date” specified in the declarations. a variation on the claims-made concept, frequently employed in professional “errors and omissions” liability policies, explicitly requires both that the claim be asserted against the insured and that the insured report the claim to the insurer during the policy period. both straight claims-made and “claims-made and reported” policies also may provide for an “extended reporting period” that comes into play if the coverage is cancelled or will not be renewed, or if the renewal or replacement policy to be issued has a later retroactive date than the expiring policy or will not be written on a claims-made basis. in those circumstances, the “extended reporting period” permits the insured to notify the insurer of occurrences or claims during a short period following policy expiry, thereby “locking in” coverage under the policy for certain claims and avoiding an unintended coverage “gap” resulting from the change in insurer or coverage.specifically, under the current claims-made cgl form, the basic “extended reporting period” permits the policyholder to give the insurer notice, not later than 60 days after the end of the policy period, of any bodily injury or property damage that took place before the end of the policy period but not before the retroactive date, in which case any claim resulting from that injury or damage may be reported to the insurer within five years of policy expiration. similarly, the insured is permitted to notify the insurer, not later than 60 days after the end of the policy period, of any “offense” committed before the end of the policy period but not before the retroactive date, in which case any “personal and advertising injury” claim resulting from that “offense” may be reported to the insurer within five years of policy expiration. finally, the insured is permitted to report to the insurer, within 60 days of the end of the policy period, any claims arising from “occurrences” or “offenses” not previously reported to the insurer, again provided that the injury or damage, or “offense,” took place before the end of the policy period but not before the retroactive date.the supreme Judicial court first addressed the “late notice” issue under a claims-made policy in Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Insurance Co., 406 Mass. 862, 551 n.e.2d 28 (1990). the particular policies at issue in Chas. T. Main were 
professional liability policies, and the court’s discussion suggests that the policies were of the “claims-made and reported” variety. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 863–64, 551 n.e.2d at 28–29 (“a claims-made policy covers the insured for claims made during the policy year and reported within that period or a specified period thereafter regardless of when the covered act or omission occurred.”) (emphasis added). it was undisputed that the underlying claim was made against the insured during the policy period and that the insured reported the claim to the primary carrier during the policy period. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 863, 551 n.e.2d at 28. it was also undisputed that the plaintiff insured did not report the claim to the defendant excess carrier until long after its policy expired. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 863, 551 n.e.2d at 28. the trial court granted the excess insurer’s motion for summary judgment on late notice grounds and the insured appealed. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 862–63, 551 n.e.2d at 28.the supreme Judicial court affirmed, ruling that neither section 112 nor Johnson Controls applies to claims-made policies, and thus the insurer need not show prejudice from the insured’s late reporting of a claim. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. 863, 865, 551 n.e.2d 28, 30 (1990). the court based its conclusion on its view of the differing purposes of “as soon as practicable” notice provisions and claims-made policy reporting requirements. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 864, 551 n.e.2d at 29. the court explained that the move to claims-made coverage was designed to achieve “fairness in rate setting” by reducing the time lag between “the insured event and the insurer’s payoff,” thereby diminishing the uncertainties that accompany the passage of time. See Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 864–65, 551 n.e.2d at 29–30. under a claims-made policy, according to the court:[t]he insured event is the claim being made against the insured during the policy period and the claim being reported to the insurer within that same period or a slightly extended, and specified period. if a claim is made against an insured, but the insurer does not know  about it until years later, the primary purpose of insuring claims rather than occurrences is frustrated. accordingly, the requirement that notice of the claim be given in the policy period or shortly thereafter  in the claims-made policy is of the essence in determining whether coverage exists.Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 865, 551 n.e.2d at 30. based on this premise, the court felt that imposition of a prejudice requirement would 

53




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

“defeat the fundamental concept” underlying claims-made coverage, with the likely result that claims-made policies “would vanish from the scene.” Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 865, 551 n.e.2d at 30. the court was unwilling to believe that the legislature intended such a result in enacting section 112. Chas. T. Main, Inc. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., 406 Mass. at 865, 551 n.e.2d at 30.the Chas. T. Main decision was most clearly justified in the context of “claims-made and reported” policies. in these policies, the risk insured against is that claims will be made and reported during the policy period. to the extent that the supreme Judicial court assumed that all claims-made policies require policy period claim reporting, however, it was mistaken. to illustrate this point, it should suffice to note that the standard claims-made cgl policy has never been a “claims-made and reported” form since its 1986 introduction. according to a widely used reference work: there is no requirement in the claims-made cgl… that a claim must be reported to the insurer during the policy period, if such a report is not “practicable.” issues of late notice and prejudice in the context of claims-made cgl coverage are essentially the same as those that would apply to occurrence coverage.J.P. gibson, M.c. Mclendon & W.J. Woodward, Commercial Liability Insurance at ii.O.4 (international risk Management institute, 1999). thus, it remained an open question in Massachusetts whether the Chas. T. Main ruling on the prejudice question would also apply to claims-made policies that do not require policy period reporting.the question appears to have been resolved by the supreme Judicial court’s decision on further appellate review in Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. 678, 677 n.e.2d at 1144677 n.e.2d at 1145677 n.e.2d at 1145677 n.e.2d at 1145. the trial court allowed the insurer’s motion, relying on Chas. T. Main. Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. at 679, 677 n.e.2d at 1145.the appeals court reversed, finding that the claims-made policy before it did not require claims to be reported during the policy period, but only that the insured provide “prompt written notice” of claims or suits and “immediately send [the insurer] copies of any demands, notices, summonses or legal papers received in connection with the claim or ‘suit,’” just as did the policy at issue in Johnson Controls. Tenovsky v. Alliance Ins. Group, 40 Mass.app.ct. 204, 206, 662 n.e.2d 716, 717 (1996) (citing Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Bowes, 381 Mass. 278, 279 n.2, 409 n.e.2d 185, 186 n.2 (1980)). the appeals court declined to follow Chas. T. Main, finding that “the policy in that case differed materially from the policy before us” due to its requirement 

54




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

that the claim be reported during the policy period. Tenovsky v. Alliance Ins. Group, 40 Mass.app.ct. at 207, 662 n.e.2d at 718. it rejected the insurer’s argument that the “extended reporting period” clause of its policy—which was operative because the policy had been cancelled—brought the case within the reasoning of Chas. T. Main. Tenovsky v. Alliance Ins. Group, 40 Mass.app.ct. at 207 n.5, 662 n.e.2d at 718 n.5.the supreme Judicial court granted further review and affirmed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the insurer. Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. 678, 679, 677 n.e.2d 1144, 1145 (1997). the court quoted at length from the Chas. T. Main opinion’s discussion of the underwriting benefits of claims-made policies. Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. at 680–81, 677 n.e.2d at 1145–46. it noted the “prompt” notice requirement of the policy conditions, observing that, “[s]urely, ‘prompt’ notice of ‘claims made’ requires that notice be given to the insurer no later than sixty days following the expiration of the policy period.” Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. at 681, 677 n.e.2d at 1145–46.  On this basis, the court concluded that the policy before it was “not materially different from the policy considered in Chas. T. Main, above. both policies require  that the claim, the insured event, be reported to the insurer during the term of the policy or at least promptly after its expiration.” Tenovsky v. Alliance Syndicate, Inc., 424 Mass. at 681, 677 n.e.2d at 1146. the court did not specify the policy language on which it relied for its finding that the policy at issue in Tenovsky contained such a reporting requirement.the reasoning of the Tenovsky opinion is arguably a departure from the supreme Judicial court’s established approach to insurance policy interpretation, in which the policy language is paramount. See, e.g., Trustees of Tufts Univ. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 415 Mass. 844, 849, 616 n.e.2d 68, 72 (1993) (discussing insurance contract interpretation principles). the court seems to have relied on a conception of the essential nature of claims-made coverage, as articulated in Chas. T. Main, to find an implied reporting requirement where the policy language did not impose such a requirement. the “extended reporting period” provision cannot serve to supply the necessary “essence,” since it does not even become operative except in the narrow circumstances (e.g., cancellation) described above. decisions such as Tenovsky, which have excepted straight claims-made policies (as opposed to “claims-made and reported” policies) from an otherwise applicable prejudice rule, have been criticized as ascribing to the claims-made approach a focus on reporting that it simply does not possess. See, e.g., J.W. stempel, Law of Insurance Contract Disputes § 9.01[c], at 9-13 to 9-17 (2d ed. 2000).

even assuming that Tenovsky remains the law of Massachusetts, it is still unclear whether section 112 will be held to apply to a case in which notice, albeit given within the policy period of a claims-made policy, is still “late” within the meaning of the notice condition. surely neither Chas. T. Main nor Tenovsky stands for the proposition that notice will always be timely so long as it is given during the policy period. this being so, it would seem reasonable to expect that section 112 will be held to apply to claims involving delayed notice given during the policy period even where coverage is on a claims-made basis. such a result would do no violence to the underwriting concepts discussed in Chas. T. Main.§ 1.3.3  The Duty to Cooperate(a) In Generalin addition to imposing an obligation to provide the insurer with prompt notice of “occurrences,” “offenses,” or claims and suits, cgl policies also require the policyholder to cooperate with the insurer in the defense and settlement of the  claim and the pursuit of any right of contribution or indemnity against third parties. in addition, the insured “must do nothing after loss” to impair the insurer’s subrogation rights. the 1966 and 1973 standard provisions for cgl policies include, as condition 4(c), the following language:the insured shall cooperate with the company and, upon the company’s request assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against any person or organization who may be liable to the insured because of injury or damage with respect to which insurance is afforded under this policy; and the insured shall attend hearings and trials and assist in 

“ The ‘extended reporting period’ provision cannot serve to supply the necessary ‘essence,’ since it does not even become operative except in the narrow circumstances (e.g., cancellation) described above.”

56




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses. the insured shall not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense other than for first aid to others at the time of accident.subsequent iterations of the standard provisions impose the same obligations, albeit in a somewhat different format.duty-to-cooperate issues arise frequently in two distinct guises. the first involves the exchange of information that commonly takes place shortly after the insurer has been notified of the “occurrence” or “claim.” insurers often contend that condition 4(c) requires the policyholder not only to share information pertinent to the claim, but also to respond fully to detailed requests for information and documents pertinent only to coverage issues. for example, where the policyholder seeks coverage for underlying hazardous waste claims, the insurer often will seek information on the question whether the releases of contaminants that form the basis of the claim were “sudden and accidental” within the meaning of the “qualified” pollution exclusion.Policyholders sometimes have espoused a more narrow view, contending that the exclusive purposes of condition 4(c) are:•  to enable an insurer that has assumed the defense to call on the insured to cooperate in the conduct of that defense; and •  to permit an insurer that has agreed to indemnify to determine whether, and on what terms, the claim will be settled. these policyholders contend that condition 4(c) simply does not speak to the exchange of information on coverage issues and is not to be used as a one-sided discovery tool to enable the insurer to develop information to support a disclaimer. arguably, the insurer’s information needs with respect to determining whether it must defend are satisfied by the complaint (see § 1.2.1(a) above), and the determination of any indemnity obligation is premature prior to disposition of the underlying claim (see § 1.2.2(a) above).the author is not aware of any Massachusetts decisional authority resolving the issue of whether condition 4(c) requires the policyholder to provide information to the insurer for purposes of its “coverage analysis.” it would appear, instead, that the question most often is dealt with through mutual cooperation between insurer and insured—each cognizant of their implied covenant of “good faith and fair dealing” 

57




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

under the contract, see Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 34 Mass.app.ct. 248, 255, 609 n.e.2d 1234, 1238 (1993), on further review, 418 Mass. 295, 303–04, 636 n.e.2d 247, 252 (1994)—regardless of what the “cooperation clause” may or may not require. Practical considerations often are paramount. for example, while it may be doctrinally defensible for the policyholder to contend that the indemnity question is premature pending the outcome of the claim, if the policyholder desires the insurer to fund a settlement—as opposed to merely making reimbursement at a later date—the insurer must be in a position to evaluate its indemnity position at the time the settlement opportunity arises.Other considerations likewise militate in favor of disclosure. a policyholder must carefully weigh the potential consequences of resisting or postponing compliance with an insurer’s request for information. suppose, for example, that a key witness  to coverage-pertinent events dies after the insurer requests information but before disclosure is made. the insurer may then claim prejudice to its position by reason of the insured’s nondisclosure, potentially supporting a forfeiture of coverage either on  a “failure to cooperate” or a “late notice” theory. Cf. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. Valley Manufactured Prods. Co., 765 f.supp. 1121 (d.Mass. 1991) (Massachusetts law), aff’d per curiam, 960 f.2d 143 (1st cir. 1992) (post-notice death of key witness to alleged accident defeats coverage on “late notice” grounds). the second context in which the cooperation obligation frequently is cited is the one for which it was most clearly designed: the relation between insurer and policyholder during the course of defense of the underlying claim. as the express language of the condition contemplates, the policyholder must make himself or herself available to testify and must comply with the insurer’s reasonable requests for assistance in developing evidence. While a breach of the cooperation condition will not relieve the insurer of its obligations in the absence of actual prejudice to its interests, see Darcy v. Hartford Ins. Co., 407 Mass. 481, 488–89 (1990), an insured’s failure to cooperate clearly can cause such prejudice. for example, in Metlife Auto & Home v. Cunningham, 59 Mass.app.ct. 583 (2003), the insured’s invocation of the fifth amendment in response to questions about the death of the plaintiff’s decedent in  a wrongful death action was found to be “the quintessence of prejudice,” justifying  a forfeiture of coverage. Metlife Auto & Home v. Cunningham, 59 Mass.app.ct. at 591–92.finally, although more common in the first-party insurance context, insurer requests for examination under oath deserve special mention because failure to comply with such a request may constitute a defense to coverage even without evidence of prejudice to the insurer. 
(b) The “Voluntary Payments” Clause another critical issue arising under condition 4(c) concerns the impact of its second sentence, which provides that the insured “shall not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense.” the so-called “voluntary payments” question often comes to the fore in environmental claims where the policyholder agrees to undertake some aspect of the investigation or cleanup of a contaminated site without first consulting the insurer—either where notice had yet to be given or where the insured is controlling the defense because the insurer has reserved the right to disclaim. assuming a commitment was in fact made, absent advance consultation with the insurer, the question arises whether this fact alone relieves the insurer of any obligation to pay the costs at issue, or whether the insurer must demonstrate prejudice to its interests resulting from the insured’s commitment. the supreme Judicial court had occasion to address this question in Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 410 Mass. 117, 571 n.e.2d 357 (1991).in Augat, the policyholder, faced with an environmental claim resulting from a discharge of contaminated water into a municipal sewer system, entered into a consent order with the commonwealth, requiring it to conduct the entire cleanup at its own expense. Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. 117, 118–19, 571 n.e.2d 357, 358 (1991). augat gave notice to the insurer only after it had signed the consent order and the consent order had been entered as a judgment in a suit filed by the commonwealth. Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. at 118–19, 571 n.e.2d at 358. in response to the insurer’s disclaimer based on the “voluntary payments” provision, augat argued, inter alia, that the insurer was required to demonstrate prejudice to its position in order to make out a forfeiture of coverage. Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. at 122, 571 n.e.2d at 358.the court acknowledged that the purpose of the “voluntary payments” language— to allow the insurer an opportunity to protect its interests—was the same as that of other provisions with respect to which a showing of prejudice is required, including the notice and consent-to-settlement provisions and the cooperation clause itself. Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. 117, 122–23, 571 n.e.2d 357, 358 (1991) (citing Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Bowes, 381 Mass. 278, 282, 409 n.e.2d 185, 187 (1980) (notice); MacInnis v. Aetna Life & Cas. Co., 403 Mass. 220, 223, 526 n.e.2d 1255, 1257 (1988) (consent –to settlement); and Darcy v. Hartford Ins. Co., 407 Mass. 481, 491, 554 n.e.2d 28, 34 (1990) (cooperation)). in the peculiar circumstances of Augat, however, the court concluded that the undisputed facts demonstrated a complete frustration of the purpose of the “voluntary payments” language, obviating any need for a further showing of prejudice. Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. at 123, 571 n.e.2d at 358. in the words of the court:

59




ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

after augat agreed to a settlement, entered into a consent judgment, assumed the obligation to pay the entire cost of the cleanup, and in fact paid a portion of that cost, it was too late for the insurer to act to protect its interests. there was nothing left for the insurer to do but issue a check. We conclude, therefore, that no showing of prejudice is required in this case.Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. at 123, 571 n.e.2d at 358; see also Atlas Tack Corp. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 48 Mass.app.ct. 378, 383–86, 721 n.e.2d 8, 12–14 (1999) (insured’s undertaking, without consulting insurer, to remove “all pollutants” from a waste site established prejudice as a matter of law and forfeited coverage for claims by state and federal agencies).after Augat, insurers frequently argued that a showing of prejudice is not required in the context of the voluntary payments clause. Policyholders interpreted the decision as simply finding prejudice on the undisputed facts due to the extreme nature of the circumstances. recent cases indicate that the latter view is correct. in its Sarnafil opinion, for example, the supreme Judicial court specifically cited Augat as standing for the proposition that prejudice must be shown before an insurer will be relieved of its obligations for breach of a policy condition. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. 295, 302, 305, 636 n.e.2d 247, 251, 253 (1994). Accord New England Extrusion, Inc. v. American Alliance Ins. Co., 874 f.supp. 467, 470–71 (d.Mass. 1995); Employers’ Liab. Assurance Corp. v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 43 Mass.app.ct. 465, 479–81, 684 n.e.2d 600, 609–10 (1997). Where the opportunity remains open, it is most prudent for the policyholder to consult with the insurer in advance of making any commitment that will result in costs for which coverage is desired. the Augat opinion at least suggests that such consultation should be sufficient, even if the insurer does not expressly assent to the undertaking; indeed, the Augat court deemed the insured’s commitment in that case to be “voluntary” precisely because the insured “had an alternative—it had the right to demand that [the insurer] defend the claim and assume the obligation to pay for the cleanup.” Augat, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 410 Mass. 117, 122, 571 n.e.2d 357, 358 (1991). Presumably, where such a demand is made and refused, the insurer ordinarily will not be heard to claim that the payment was “voluntary.” See Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. 295, 305 n.6, 636 n.e.2d 247, 253 n.6 (1994) (citing Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. 777, 779 (d.Mass. 1977) (where insurer has reserved rights, it is obligated to consent to reasonable voluntary action by insured)); Berke Moore Co. v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co., 345 Mass. 66, 70–71, 185 n.e.2d 637, 639–40 (1962) (insurer that improperly declines to defend may not avoid liability in reliance on policy provision that limits its obligation to the amount of a settlement consented to by it).

(c) Pre-Tender Coststhe “voluntary payments” clause often is invoked by insurers (together with policy notice provisions) in refusing to reimburse for costs the insured has incurred in response to a claim or suit before notifying the insurer or “tendering” the defense. insurers often refuse to reimburse “pre-tender costs” even where they do not otherwise disclaim coverage. they contend that, since they had no opportunity to have any influence at all on the decisions leading to the expenditures, this alone should suffice for a showing of prejudice, assuming such a showing is required. no Massachusetts appellate decision has yet addressed a situation in which a policyholder sought reimbursement for costs incurred before the insurer had any notice at all regarding a claim. nevertheless, the Sarnafil decision is very nearly on point and may signal that Massachusetts will require a prejudice showing to justify  an insurer’s refusal to reimburse pre-tender costs. Sarnafil was a dispute between  a roofing manufacturer and its insurer over defense coverage for claims asserted against the manufacturer by an installer of its roofing products. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. 295, 298 (1994). the insured manufacturer advised the insurer of the installer’s claim when it first received a claim letter from the installer. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 298–99. the insurer reserved rights and eventually advised the insured by letter that, although it did not believe the allegations in the installer’s claim letter to be covered, it would review this position  “as further developments… occur and more specific claims are made.” Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 299–301. after the insurer reserved rights, the insured filed an arbitration proceeding against the installer as a preemptive measure, in response to the installer’s threat to file a lawsuit. the installer promptly filed a counterclaim in the arbitration. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 300. the insured then handled the entire arbitration proceeding, which involved twenty-six days of hearings, with its own counsel, and did not notify the insurer of the installer’s arbitration counterclaim—the matter defended—until after the proceedings were completed. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 301. When the insurer refused to reimburse the costs its insured incurred in connection with the arbitration, the insured filed a coverage action seeking reimbursement of defense costs. Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 296–301.“ …the Sarnafil decision is very nearly on point and may signal that Massachusetts will require a prejudice showing to justify an insurer’s refusal to reimburse pre-tender costs.”

the Sarnafil court reversed a grant of summary judgment in favor of the insurer with regard to the counterclaim defense costs, finding, inter alia, that there were factual disputes over “whether [the insurer] actually suffered any prejudice as a result of [the insured’s] actions,” and thus whether the insured’s “violations frustrated the purposes of the notice and voluntary payment provisions.” Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 302. the court later reiterated that, “before [the insurer] could be relieved of responsibility based on [the insured’s] violations of insurance provisions, [the insurer] would have to show that it incurred actual prejudice.” Sarnafil, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 418 Mass. at 305. thus, notwithstanding that the Sarnafil insurer did not receive notice of the “suit” (the arbitration counterclaim) until after it was resolved, the court nevertheless required a showing of prejudice in order for the insurer to avoid reimbursement of defense costs. given that standard policies have independent requirements for claim and suit notification, and that only a “suit” invokes the duty to defend, it is arguable that the insurer’s prior receipt of a claim notice in Sarnafil was irrelevant to the result, and that Sarnafil should control in the more typical “pre-tender costs” case dealing with expenditures made before any notice  was given. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Black & Decker Corp., 383 f.supp.2d 200, 207 (d.Mass. 2004), supports this approach. reasoning that “[t]he widely-followed late notice doctrine under which post-notice costs are recoverable absent prejudice, but pre-notice costs are per se excluded, is in tension with the underpinnings of Massachusetts’s analysis of the notice clause,” the Black & Decker court predicted that the supreme Judicial court would permit recovery of pre-notice defense costs absent prejudice. 

§ 1.3.4  The Duty to Mitigate Damagesthe 1966 version of the standard cgl form contained, as part of the same condition imposing notice and cooperation duties, a clause providing that, in the event of an “occurrence,” “[t]he insured shall promptly take at his expense all reasonable steps to prevent other bodily injury or property damage from arising out of the same or similar conditions, but such expense shall not be recoverable under this policy.” the quoted sentence, which might be described as a mitigation-of-damages clause, was dropped in 1973. it would be a mistake, however, to conclude that, under more recent policies, the insured has no mitigation duty. if the insured is aware of a defect or other condition in its products, premises or operations that is causing injury or damage, then, at least to the extent that the damage-causing agent has yet to escape from the insured’s actual control, the insured must correct the problem or coverage for further injury or damage will be lost.the appropriate limit of an insured’s mitigation duty under the 1966 form was examined in Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indemnity Co., 425 f.supp. 777 (d.Mass. 1977). in that case, the insured sought coverage for costs incurred to clean up an oil spill in navigable waters. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 778. as soon as the insured learned of the spill, it notified its insurer and requested that the insurer fund an emergency cleanup. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 778–79. the insurer did not respond. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 779. rather than await government intervention at a cost expected to exceed the limit of the policy, the insured conducted a partial cleanup itself and sought reimbursement from the insurer. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 779. the insurer finally responded by disclaiming coverage in reliance on the mitigation clause and the voluntary payments clause discussed above. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 779. the insured sued to recover its costs. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp.  at 778.the court easily disposed of the insurer’s contention that the mitigation provision required the insured to incur the cleanup expenses and that, under that provision,  the costs were not recoverable under the policy. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. 777, 778 (d.Mass. 1977). the court (aldrich, J.) reasoned as follows:in terms, and concept, [the mitigation clause] imposes a duty on plaintiff to take steps to prevent further injury—to correct the fault—
not to repair or restore what has already occurred. if the insured had to repair at its own expense the damage that had already occurred, the policy would be meaningless.Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 778. the court also rejected the insurer’s “voluntary payments” defense, relying on Murach v. Massachusetts Bonding & Insurance Co., 339 Mass. 184, 187, 158 n.e.2d 338, 341 (1959), and the insurer’s duty to settle. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 779. in the court’s view, under “the principle of good faith and reasonableness,” the insurer could not be permitted to deny liability in the circumstances. Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. at 779.Judge aldrich’s view of the purpose of the mitigation clause is confirmed by a memorandum promulgated by a predecessor of the insurance services Office that explains the changes in the 1973 standard cgl form. according to that memorandum, the mitigation clause was deleted because it “had been read by some as a policy limitation although it was not intended as such but rather was directed only toward emphasizing that any steps taken would be at the expense of the insured.” the memorandum noted a related change to the “supplementary Payments” provision, making clear that the policy would reimburse the insured for reasonable expenses incurred at the company’s request in assisting the insurer in the investigation or defense of any claim or suit. it emphasized that, “as heretofore, the definition of ‘occurrence’ would be relied upon in an appropriate case as to whether the injury or damage was expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured.”this passage shows that the Chemical Applications interpretation of the mitigation provision was correct, in addition to showing why a mitigation duty—or its functional equivalent—remains even after the clause was eliminated. that the clause was not intended as a “policy limitation” suggests that it was not intended to do what the insurer in Chemical Applications sought to accomplish with its invocation—to shift a loss otherwise chargeable to it back to the policyholder. See Chemical Applications Co. v. Home Indem. Co., 425 f.supp. 777, 779–80 (d.Mass. 1977). that the clause was not necessary to compel the insured to “correct the fault” is pointed up by the reference to the requirement that the harm resulting from an occurrence not be “expected or intended” by the insured. Once the insured is aware that a fault exists (for example, that an oil pipe has sprung a leak and is contaminating a waterway), if the insured nevertheless fails to repair the fault (in this case, the leak), the damage resulting from the fault ceases to be unexpected, and coverage is lost. Cf. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. v. Belleville Indus., 407 Mass. 675, 681 n.6, 555 n.e.2d 568, 572 n.6 (1990) (in construing the “sudden and accidental” 

exception to a pollution exclusion, the court noted that, if a “discharge, initially both accidental and sudden, continues for an extended period, …at some point, presumably, it would likely cease to be accidental or sudden (even in the sense of unexpected)”). Whether express or implied, a duty to mitigate of the sort described in Chemical Applications would appear always to exist under a cgl policy.

EXHIBIT C -  Court’s Allowance of Protective Order in American 

About Foley Hoag LLPfoley hoag llP is a leading national law firm in the areas of dispute resolution, intellectual property, and corporate transactions for emerging, middle-market,  and large-cap companies. With a deep understanding of clients’ strategic priorities, operational imperatives, and marketplace realities, the firm helps companies in the biopharma, high technology, energy technology, financial services and manufacturing sectors gain competitive advantage. the firm’s 225 lawyers located in boston, Washington, and the emerging enterprise center in Waltham, Massachsetts join with  a network of lex Mundi law firms to provide global support for clients’ largest challenges and opportunities. for more information visit foleyhoag.com.About the Authors click an image below for a full biography.

ObligatiOns Of insurer and POlicyhOlder

Foley Hoag eBook Library sample other free titles from the foley hoag ebook library, sign-up for industry-specific alerts and updates from foley hoag, or visit our Web site.you may also be interested in our ebook series. simply click on an image to download or visit foleyhoag.com for our library. 
Business contracts commonly contain indemnity
obligations
– Construction
– Manufacturing
– Vendor/Vendee
– Service Agreements
– Lease Agreements
Sample Contractual Indemnity Provision
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the
Subcontractor shall defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the Contractor and all of its agents and
employees from and against all claims, damages,
losses, and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, in
any way arising out of or resulting from the
performance, condition, or existence of the work
under the contract, whether or not such claim,
damage, loss, or expense is based in whole or in part
upon any negligent act or omission of the Contractor.
Example of Contractual Indemnification in
Construction Context
 General contractor contracts with subcontractor to
perform work at construction site
Contract requires subcontractor to indemnify
general contractor for claims arising from work
General contractor sued when third party injured at
construction site
General contractor seeks indemnification from
subcontractorNew York General Obligations Law
A party is entitled to full contractual indemnity where such an
intention can be clearly implied from the terms of a contract.
Drzewinski v. Atlantic Scaffold & Ladder, 70 N.Y.2d 774, 521
N.Y.S.2d 216 (1987); New York Telephone Co. v. Gulf Oil Corp., 203
A.D.2d 26, 609 N.Y.S.2d 244 (1st Dept. 1994).
? Even a finding of negligence on the part of the contractually
indemnified party does not defeat said party’s right to contractual
indemnity. Ameri v. Diane Young Skincare Ctr., 170 A.D. 280, 565
N.Y.S.2d 810 (1st Dept. 1991), appeal dismissed, 78 N.Y.2d 907,
573 N.Y.S.2d 468 (1991); See also Buccini v. 1568 Broadway
Assocs., 673 N.Y.S.2d 398 (1st Dept. 1998) (holding that the owner’s
strict liability pursuant to statute does not preclude contractual
indemnification from the contractor.)
New York General Obligations Law
However, if the contract wording provides for
indemnification of the indemnitee’s own negligence
it may be unenforceable under the New York
General Obligations law. New York GOL §5-322-1
provides:New York General Obligations Law
"A covenant, promise, agreement or understanding in, or in connection with or
collateral to a contract or agreement relative to the construction, alternation, repair
or maintenance of a building, structure, appurtenances and appliances including
moving, demolition and excavating connected therewith, purporting to indemnity or
hold harmless the promisee against liability for damage arising out of bodily injury to
persons or damage to property contributed to, caused by or resulting from the
negligence of the promisee, his agents or employees, or indemnitee, whether such
negligence be in whole or in part, is against public policy and is void and
unenforceable; provided that this section shall not affect the validity of any
insurance contract workers’ compensation agreement or other agreement issued by
an admitted insurer. This subdivision shall not preclude a promisee requiring
indemnification for damages arising out of bodily injury to persons or damage to
property caused by or resulting from the negligence of a party other than the
promisee, whether or not the promisee is partially negligent.”
New York General Obligations Law
Similar statutes are contained in the GOL for other
type of contracts, see, e.g. GOL 5-321, landlord;
GOL-322, caterers; GOL 5-323, building
maintenance contractors.
Coverage for Contractual Indemnification
Obligation to indemnify does not necessarily
trigger coverage under indemnitor’s policy
What steps can be taken to secure coverage
for contractual indemnification obligations?
Two most common ways:
– Contractual liability coverage
– Additional insured endorsement covering
indemnitee
Contractual Liability Coverage
CGL policies exclude liabilities the insured
assumed by contract
– Intended to exclude breach of contract claims
 This policy does not apply toContractual Liability CoverageTwo exceptions:
– Liability the insured would have in the absence of
contract
– Liability assumed in an “insured contract”
The Facts:
– Ewing contracted with a school district in Texas to
build tennis courts. The courts began cracking and
flaking. The school district filed suit against Ewing
alleging breach of contract and negligence for the
faulty construction. Ewing tendered its claim to its
insurer, Amerisure, which denied coverage.
The Holdings:
– Amerisure contended that its’ policy’s "contractual
liability exclusion" applied to exclude defense
coverage for Ewing’s claim. The district court
granted summary judgment in favor of Amerisure on
that basis, and the Fifth Circuit affirmed.The Holdings:
– Amerisure contended that its’ policy’s "contractual
liability exclusion" applied to exclude defense
coverage for Ewing’s claim. The district court
granted summary judgment in favor of Amerisure on
that basis, and the Fifth Circuit affirmed.Gilbert sought indemnity from Lloyds.
Texas Supreme Court ruled that the promise to
repair any damaged property was a contractual
obligation.
– The exception to the exclusion for liability that you
would have in the absence of any contract did not
apply in this case since all negligence allegations
had been dismissed. But for the existence of the
contract, Gilbert would have no liability. Simple
enough.Failing to take into account the unique facts of
Gilbert, the majority of the Fifth Circuit panel
applied the contractual liability exclusion to Ewing's
claims, citing Gilbert.
The typical contractual liability exclusion excludes
bodily injury and property damage "for which the
insured is obligated to pay damages by reason of
the assumption of liability in a contract or
agreement."
However, there is an exception for liability "the
insured would have in the absence of the contract
or agreement" and for liability assumed under an
"insured contract." Ewing was sued for breach of contract AND negligence. Ewing
would be liable for that negligence claim in the absence of the
contract or agreement. Simple, right? Maybe not…or so says the
Fifth Circuit:
“The School District's use of the term ‘negligence,’ however is not dispositive….
When the only loss or damage is to the subject matter of the contract, the plaintiff's
action is ordinarily on the contract. Ewing's contract with the School District is the
source of its potential liability because Ewing's duty to construct usable tennis courts
arose out of contractual undertakings. Further, the damage alleged in the School
District's complaint is damage to the subject matter of the contract, the tennis
courts, not to any other property. The school district's claim therefore sounds in
contract, regardless of the other labels that may be attached to it…. Because the
liability Ewing faces is contractual, it is not liability that would arise in the absence of
a contract. The exception, therefore, does not apply and coverage remains
excluded. We hold that Amerisure owes no duty to defend Ewing in the underlying
lawsuit.” 
If the Ewing analysis survives, the long-recognized
"eight-corners rule" for determining a duty to defend is
in jeopardy, as is completed operations coverage
generally, at least in federal courts in Texas. Under
Ewing, even where a plaintiff alleges a clear claim for
negligence, that is not enough to trigger a defense
obligation. Under Ewing, the defective work must
damage something outside the “subject matter of the
Contract” for coverage to attach. This negates a
contractor's completed operations coverage for work in
place. If kept alive, the implications of this decision
could be grave for general contractors.
Risk transfer method that allows one party to
a business relationship to obtain coverage
under another party’s policy
Grants indemnitee direct coverage rights
under the indemnitor’s policy
Scope of coverage variesNamed Insured: Party whose policy provides
coverage for additional insured
– E.g., the indemnitor
Additional Insured: Party seeking to take
advantage of another party’s coverage
– E.g., the indemnitee
Obligations of Insurance Companies When Handling Claims
Article provided by Furtado Jaspovice & Simons LC. Please visit our Web site at www.fjslaw.com.
When a policyholder files a claim under his or her own insurance policy, the insurer has certain obligations to the insured and has a duty to act with good faith in handling that claim. This is a very different situation from when a person files a personal injury lawsuit (for example, in a case involving medical malpractice or a car accident) and there is an insurance company for the defendant involved. The defendant's insurance company owes no duty to the plaintiff; it's only obligations are towards the insured defendant. This article provides a brief overview of the duties that insurance companies have when handling claims.
Unfair Claim Settlement Practices
Generally speaking, insurance companies have certain responsibilities when handling claims made by the people they insure. Insurance companies must act in good faith when handling a claim; thoroughly investigate claims; respond to claims promptly; pay or deny claims within a reasonable time; and if denying a claim, provide a written explanation of the reasons for the denial.
Section 790.03(h) of the California Insurance Code sets forth a list of sixteen things that constitute unfair claim settlement practices. These practices include:
Misrepresenting facts or policy provisions to claimants
Failing to respond to communications about claims within a reasonable time
Failing to follow reasonable standards for prompt investigation and claim processing
Failing to allow or deny claims within a reasonable period of time
Failing to act in good faith to reach prompt, fair and equitable settlements where liability is reasonably clear
Compelling policyholders to sue to recover insurance benefits by offering substantially less to settle a claim than what is ultimately recovered
Trying to settle claims for less than what a reasonable person would believe he or she was entitled to because of advertising material that accompanied the application
Trying to settle claims based on applications that were changed without the knowledge or consent of the insured
Failing to tell insureds or beneficiaries of coverage under which payment was made
Letting insureds know that it is the insurer's practice of appealing arbitration awards in favor of insureds as a way to compel the insured to accept a lower settlement
Delaying the investigation or payment of claims by requiring an insured to submit a preliminary claim report plus a formal proof of loss that contains substantially the same information
Failing to promptly settle claims where liability is clear as a way to influence the insured to settle a claim under another portion of the policy
Failing to reasonably explain the denial of a claim in a prompt manner
Telling an insured not to retain an attorney
Misleading an insured about the applicable statute of limitations
Delaying payment of benefits for services provided with respect to AIDS for more than 60 days after receiving a claim if the delay is to investigate whether the condition preexisted the coverage

Bad Faith Lawsuits
If an insurance company acts in bad faith or engages in conduct that constitutes an unfair settlement practice, the insured can bring a lawsuit against the insurance company. In Wilson v. 21st Century Ins. Co., 42 Cal.4th 713, 171 P.3d 1082 (Cal., 2007), a recent case involving first party insurance bad faith in the automobile insurance context, the California Supreme Court reversed a grant of summary judgment for the insurance company, finding that there was an issue of fact as to whether the insurance company acted unreasonably and in bad faith in denying the plaintiff's claim. In Wilson, the insurance company eventually did pay the plaintiff's claim two years after initially denying her benefits.
In addition to filing a bad faith lawsuit, people who are having problems dealing with their insurance companies can file a complaint with the California Insurance Commissioner. Before filing such a complaint, the insured should try to resolve the issue with the insurance company. If the insured is unsuccessful in dealing with an insurance company that is not upholding obligations, then he or she should contact the California Insurance Commissioner. The California Insurance Commissioner can help individuals with issues such as misrepresentations made by insurance agents; cancellations of policies that violate the law; wrongful delays in paying or denying a claim; and improper denials of claims. 
Obligations Only to Insureds
As stated above, insurance companies owe no duties to third parties. Their obligations to act in good faith and avoid unfair settlement practices extend only to their insureds. For example, suppose a person who is injured in a car accident sues the driver who caused the accident and wins a damages award. If the person who caused the accident has car insurance, it is likely that the insurance company will be involved in paying the award. That insurance company has no obligations to act in a certain way in its interactions with the injured person. The insurance company only owes duties to the insured party. Generally, the insurance company will provide that person an attorney.
Additional Insureds: The Importance of Indemnity and Insurance Provisions in Contracts and Policy Language
Indemnification and insurance provisions are common features of many types of commercial contracts, including construction, engineering, oil and gas, and product distribution contracts. These contractual provisions reflect an effort by parties to contractually allocate risk, and to provide for insurance as a backstop for the contractual allocation of risk.
This contractual allocation of risk and insurance backstop involve three separate components: (1) an indemnification provision; (2) an insurance provision; and (3) an additional insured provision.
Much has been written about the different types of indemnification provisions — how they have been interpreted and restrictions on indemnifying a party for its sole negligence. Thus, this article will focus on contractual insurance provisions and additional insured provisions that may be used as a backstop.

Scope of Additional Insured Coverage: Contractual Provisions and Language of Insurance Policy
Contractual insurance provisions and additional insured language in insurance policies are often viewed as intertwined with indemnification provisions in a contract. In other words, parties may intend that the additional insured’s right to coverage apply to the other party’s indemnification obligations, but not to cover any liability of the additional insured that is beyond the scope of any contractual indemnification provision.
For example, many jurisdictions prohibit indemnification for the indemnitee’s sole negligence, and the parties may assume that the additional insured’s rights only extend to liability arising out of the indemnitor’s negligence and not to the indemnitee’s negligence or even sole negligence To the extent the parties intend for the indemnitee’s rights as an additional insured to be limited to the indemnitor’s obligation to indemnify, it is important for the parties to pay careful attention to both the insurance provisions of the contract as well as any additional insured provisions or endorsements.
While the parties may assume that both merely backstop the indemnification provision, cases in several different jurisdictions — including recent cases in Texas involving the petroleum industry — demonstrate the potential that insurance provisions in a contract and additional insured provisions in a policy, may be interpreted to provide the additional insured with coverage for all of its liability, including liability beyond any contractual indemnification obligation, and extending to the sole negligence of the indemnitee.
Initially, if the parties’ intention is that the additional insured is entitled to coverage for only the indemnitor’s indemnification obligation, this intention should be explicitly stated in the contract’s insurance provision so that the court does not extend the additional insured’s right to coverage beyond its right to indemnification under the contract, including the sole negligence of the indemnitee.
For example, in Shell Oil Co. v. Nat. Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, PA, 44 Cal.App.4th 1633 ( 2nd Dist. 1966), the insured entered into a contract to perform engineering work on a refinery owned by Shell, and agreed in the contract to indemnify Shell excepting liability resulting from Shell’s sole negligence.
Although the insurance provision obligated the contractor to obtain “Comprehensive General Liability Insurance, including product/completed operations coverage and contractual liability coverage for [contractor's] obligations hereunder to defend and/or indemnify Shell”, the contract also provided, “To the fullest extent permitted by law, all insurance policies maintained by [contractor] … shall include Shell and any parties in joint operation with Shell as additional insureds… ”
As a result, the court held that Shell was entitled to coverage as an additional insured for its sole negligence, stating, “There is no textual or practical reason to perceive the broad, plain language of these insurance provisions of the contract as requiring coverage only for [contractor’s] indemnity obligations.”
A similar case is Hartford Acc. and Ind. Co. v. U.S. Natural Resources, Inc., 897 F.Supp. 466 (D. Or. 1995), in which the insured entered into a contract with the additional insured for installation of certain machinery being built for the additional insured. In the contract, the insured agreed to indemnify the additional insured, excluding liability arising out of the additional insured’s sole negligence, and to procure certain insurance.
The insurance obtained by the additional insured contained a broad form comprehensive general liability endorsement that included as an “insured” any organization to whom the “name insured” was obligated to provide insurance pursuant to a written contract. After an employee of the insured was injured, the insured asserted that the additional insured was not entitled to coverage inasmuch as the indemnification provision did not entitle the additional insured to indemnification for its own negligence.
The court, however, rejected any reference to the indemnity provision in limiting the additional insured’s right to coverage, holding that “Nothing in the language of the insurance clause or any other provision of the … contract ties the insurance requirements to the indemnity clause….” Therefore, if the parties to a contract desire to limit the additional insured’s coverage to an obligation to indemnify, the insurance provision should be linked to the indemnity provision, and specifically state that the additional insured’s rights to coverage is limited to any obligation of the other party to indemnify it under the contract.
Additional Insured Provisions/Endorsements May Override Contractual Insurance Limitations
Even if the insurance provision is explicitly limited to any obligation to indemnify, the additional insured may be held to have unlimited rights to coverage beyond any indemnity obligation if the additional insured provision in the policy or endorsement does not limit the additional insured’s rights to coverage.
An example of this can be observed in the recent Texas case: In Re Deepwater Horizon, 710 F.3d 338 (5th Cir. 2013). In Deepwater Horizon, the insured, the owner of an off-shore drilling unit, entered into a drilling contract with an oil company in which the insured agreed to maintain certain insurance and to name the oil company “as additional insureds in each of [the insured’s] policies, except Workers' Compensation for liabilities assumed by [the insured] under the terms of this Contract.”
After an explosion aboard the drilling unit, the oil company sought coverage as an additional insured under the insured’s liability insurance policies, and the insurers filed a declaratory judgment action seeking a declaration that they had no obligation to the oil company. Although the policy limited the insured’s obligation to name the oil company as an additional insured to “liabilities assumed by [the insured],” the oil company argued that “the insurance policies alone — and not the indemnities detailed in the Drilling Contract — govern the scope of [the oil company’s] coverage rights as an ‘additional insured.’”
While the lower court held that the contract “required [the insured] to name [the oil company] as an insured only for liabilities [the insured] explicitly assumed under the contract,” the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, finding that “[e]ven if the [insurance] clause is construed as the insurers desire, that is, even if it is understood to mean that [the oil company] is an additional insured under [the insured’s] policies only for liabilities [the insured] specifically assumed in the Drilling Contract, … [the] clause was insufficient to limit coverage.”
In holding that the oil company was an additional insured without limitation to any indemnity obligation of the insured, the Fifth Circuit held that “we are bound to look only to the policy itself to determine whether BP is covered in the current case.” See also Evanston Ins. Co. v. Atofina Petrochemicals, Inc., 256 S.W. 3d 660 (Tx. 2008). As a result, if the intent of the parties is to limit the additional insured’s rights to coverage for the indemnity obligations in the contract, the insured should ensure that the policy limits the additional insured’s rights, rather than leaving the additional insured’s rights undefined and giving it the right — at least under Texas law — to recover for liability outside the insured’s indemnity obligation, including, potentially, the additional insured’s sole negligence.
Indemnification and insurance provisions have been, and will continue to be, important tools in managing risks in contracts involving services and products. Where one party agrees to indemnify the other, the parties may only intend that the indemnitee’s right to insurance coverage extend only to the other party’s obligation to indemnify it under the contract. If that is the parties’ intention, it is important that the insured consult legal counsel and determine to what extent the insurance provision and the insurance policy need to specify that the additional insured’s rights extend no further than any indemnify obligation in the contract. It is important to note that such limitations in the contract should only serve to limit the additional insured’s rights and not any rights the insured may have under the policy for its own liability.
In insurance, the insurance policy is a contract (generally a standard form contract) between the insurer and the insured, known as the policyholder, which determines the claims which the insurer is legally required to pay. In exchange for an initial payment, known as the premium, the insurer promises to pay for loss caused by perils covered under the policy language.

Insurance contracts are designed to meet specific needs and thus have many features not found in many other types of contracts. Since insurance policies are standard forms, they feature boilerplate language which is similar across a wide variety of different types of insurance policies.

The insurance policy is generally an integrated contract, meaning that it includes all forms associated with the agreement between the insured and insurer.[1]:10 In some cases, however, supplementary writings such as letters sent after the final agreement can make the insurance policy a non-integrated contract.[1]:11 One insurance textbook states that generally "courts consider all prior negotiations or agreements ... every contractual term in the policy at the time of delivery, as well as those written afterwards as policy riders and endorsements ... with both parties' consent, are part of written policy".[2] The textbook also states that the policy must refer to all papers which are part of the policy.[2] Oral agreements are subject to the parol evidence rule, and may not be considered part of the policy if the contract appears to be whole. Advertising materials and circulars are typically not part of a policy.[2] Oral contracts pending the issuance of a written policy can occur.
General features[edit]
The insurance contract or agreement is a contract whereby the insurer will pay the insured (the person whom benefits would be paid to, or on behalf of), if certain defined events occur. Subject to the "fortuity principle", the event must be uncertain. The uncertainty can be either as to when the event will happen (e.g. in a life insurance policy, the time of the insured's death is uncertain) or as to if it will happen at all (e.g. in a fire insurance policy, whether or not a fire will occur at all).

Insurance contracts are generally considered contracts of adhesion because the insurer draws up the contract and the insured has little or no ability to make material changes to it. This is interpreted to mean that the insurer bears the burden if there is any ambiguity in any terms of the contract. Insurance policies are sold without the policyholder even seeing a copy of the contract.[1]:27 In 1970 Robert Keeton suggested that many courts were actually applying 'reasonable expectations' rather than interpreting ambiguities, which he called the 'reasonable expectations doctrine'. This doctrine has been controversial, with some courts adopting it and others explicitly rejecting it.[3] In several jurisdictions, including California, Wyoming, and Pennsylvania, the insured is bound by clear and conspicuous terms in the contract even if the evidence suggests that the insured did not read or understand them.[4][5][6]
Insurance contracts are aleatory in that the amounts exchanged by the insured and insurer are unequal and depend upon uncertain future events. In contrast, ordinary non-insurance contracts are commutative in that the amounts (or values) exchanged are usually intended by the parties to be roughly equal. This distinction is particularly important in the context of exotic products like finite risk insurance which contain "commutation" provisions.
Insurance contracts are unilateral, meaning that only the insurer makes legally enforceable promises in the contract. The insured is not required to pay the premiums, but the insurer is required to pay the benefits under the contract if the insured has paid the premiums and met certain other basic provisions.
Insurance contracts are governed by the principle of utmost good faith (uberrima fides) which requires both parties of the insurance contract to deal in good faith and in particular it imparts on the insured a duty to disclose all material facts which relate to the risk to be covered. This contrasts with the legal doctrine that covers most other types of contracts, caveat emptor (let the buyer beware). In the United States, the insured can sue an insurer in tort for acting in bad faith.
Structure[edit]
Early insurance contracts tended to be written on the basis of every single type of risk (where risks were defined extremely narrowly), and a separate premium was calculated and charged for each. This structure proved unsustainable in the context of the Second Industrial Revolution, in that a typical large conglomerate might have dozens of types of risks to insure against.

In the 1940s, the insurance industry shifted to the current system where covered risks are initially defined broadly in an insuring agreement on a general policy form (e.g., "We will pay all sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages..."), then narrowed down by subsequent exclusion clauses (e.g., "This insurance does not apply to..."). If the insured desires coverage for a risk taken out by an exclusion on the standard form, the insured can sometimes pay an additional premium for an endorsement to the policy that overrides the exclusion.

Insurers have been criticized in some quarters for the development of complex policies with layers of interactions between coverage clauses, conditions, exclusions, and exceptions to exclusions. In a case interpreting one ancestor of the modern "products-completed operations hazard" clause, the Supreme Court of California complained:

“	The instant case presents yet another illustration of the dangers of the present complex structuring of insurance policies. Unfortunately the insurance industry has become addicted to the practice of building into policies one condition or exception upon another in the shape of a linguistic Tower of Babel. We join other courts in decrying a trend which both plunges the insured into a state of uncertainty and burdens the judiciary with the task of resolving it. We reiterate our plea for clarity and simplicity in policies that fulfill so important a public service.[7]	”
Parts of an insurance contract[edit]
Declarations - identifies who is an insured, the insured's address, the insuring company, what risks or property are covered, the policy limits (amount of insurance), any applicable deductibles, the policy period and premium amount. These are usually provided on a form that is filled out by the insurer based on the insured's application and attached on top of or inserted within the first few pages of the standard policy form.
Definitions - define important terms used in the policy language.
Insuring agreement - describes the covered perils, or risks assumed, or nature of coverage, or makes some reference to the contractual agreement between insurer and insured. It summarizes the major promises of the insurance company, as well as stating what is covered.
Exclusions - take coverage away from the Insuring Agreement by describing property, perils, hazards or losses arising from specific causes which are not covered by the policy.
Conditions - provisions, rules of conduct, duties and obligations required for coverage. If policy conditions are not met, the insurer can deny the claim.
Endorsements - additional forms attached to the policy form that modify it in some way, either unconditionally or upon the existence of some condition. Endorsements can make policies difficult to read for nonlawyers; they may modify or delete clauses located several pages earlier in the standard insuring agreement, or even modify each other. Because it is very risky to allow nonlawyer underwriters to directly rewrite core policy language with word processors, insurers usually direct underwriters to modify standard forms by attaching endorsements preapproved by counsel for various common modifications.
Policy riders - A policy rider is used to convey the terms of a policy amendment and the amendment thereby becomes part of the policy. Riders are dated and numbered so that both insurer and policyholder can determine provisions and the benefit level. Common riders to group medical plans involve name changes, change to eligible classes of employees, change in level of benefits, or the addition of a managed care arrangement such as an Health Maintenance Organization or Preferred Provider Organization (PPO).[8]
Policy jackets - A policy jacket is a cover, binder, envelope, or presentation folder with pockets in which the policy may be delivered. Historically, standard boilerplate provisions common to an entire family of policies were often printed on the jacket itself; then the underwriter would type up the declarations form and insert that form along with insuring agreement and endorsement forms into the jacket to assemble a complete policy. They are increasingly rare because jackets do not feed through automatic document feeders and must be manually copied or scanned in order to produce a complete image of the entire policy text. Some insurers now use the term "jacket" for a set of papers appended to all policies which serve the same purpose as a traditional policy jacket.
Industry standard forms[edit]
In the United States, property and casualty insurers typically use similar or even identical language in their standard insurance policies, which are drafted by advisory organizations such as the Insurance Services Office and the American Association of Insurance Services.[9] This reduces the regulatory burden for insurers as policy forms must be approved by states; it also allows consumers to more readily compare policies, albeit at the expense of consumer choice.[9] In addition, as policy forms are reviewed by courts, the interpretations become more predictable as courts elaborate upon the interpretation of the same clauses in the same policy forms, rather than different policies from different insurers.[10]

In recent years, however, insurers have increasingly modified the standard forms in company-specific ways or declined to adopt changes[11] to standard forms. For example, a review of home insurance policies found substantial differences in various provisions.[12] In some areas such as directors and officers liability insurance[13] and personal umbrella insurance[14] there is little industry-wide standardization.

Manuscript policies and endorsements
For the vast majority of insurance policies, the only page that is heavily custom-written to the insured's needs is the declarations page. All other pages are standard forms that refer back to terms defined in the declarations as needed.

However, certain types of insurance, such as media insurance, are written as manuscript policies, which are either custom-drafted from scratch or written from a mix of standard and nonstandard forms.[15] By analogy, policy endorsements which are not written on standard forms or whose language is custom-written to fit the insured's particular circumstances are known as manuscript endorsements.
Background to the case

Permanent Trustee had obtained professional indemnity insurance for the period 1 October 1990 to 30 September 1991, with Sedgwick acting as its brokers. Cover was arranged in four layers and the primary layer was lead by a Lloyds syndicate. FAI was one of the excess insurers and accepted 35 per cent of the first excess layer and 33.5 per cent of the second excess layer with FAI's total financial exposure amounting to $10.2 million. 

In August 1991, Permanent Trustee instructed Sedgwick to begin the renewal process. However by that stage, Sedgwick was concerned about FAI's financial stability (as it had been downgraded by Standard and Poor's) and, as a result, Sedgwick decided not to place the renewal with FAI, if it could be placed elsewhere.

On 20 September 1991, the lead underwriter asked to see more information before it was prepared to renew and, given the shortage of time before the date of renewal, suggested that the existing cover be extended for 30 days on the basis of a pro-rated premium. Sedgwick sought the agreement of all the insurers on risk, including FAI, to the proposed 30 day extension. 

The task of approaching FAI fell to a junior employee, Mr Welsh. Mr Welsh spoke to FAI and asked them to agree to the 30-day extension. As instructed, Mr Welsh did not mention Sedgwick's intention not to renew the insurance with FAI. FAI agreed to the 30 day extension. The conversation between Mr Welsh and FAI and its consequences were fundamentally important at trial. The first instance judge found as fact that:
FAI's underwriter believed that it would be invited to quote for participation in the renewal; and

FAI would not have granted the extension if it knew that Permanent Trustee did not intend to invite it to participate in the renewal.


During the 30-day extension period, Permanent Trustee notified a circumstance arising that ultimately lead to a claim. The total claim was settled for $100.1 million, of which $36 million fell to insurers. Both layers in which FAI participated were total losses. 

FAI refused to meet its share of the money payable on settlement and Permanent Trustee commenced proceedings against FAI.

Disclosure by the insured 
Generally while insureds remain obliged to disclose matters relevant to the risk insured, this ruling means they are not obliged to disclose matters falling within what the High Court called 'matters of commerciality'. 

The Insurance Contracts Act 1984 (the Act) regulates the insured's duties of disclosure. Section 21 provides that, before entering into a contract of insurance, an insured has a duty to disclose to an insurer:
every matter that the insured knows to be a matter relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms (s21(1)(a)); and

every matter that a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be such a relevant matter (s21(1)(b)).


Section 26(2) provides that a statement made by a person in connection with a proposed contract of insurance is not a misrepresentation unless the person who made the statement knew (or a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to have known) that the statement would have been relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms.

In Permanent Trustee Australia Limited v FAI General Insurance Company Ltd (in liq) [2003] HCA 25, the High Court was asked to rule on whether Permanent Trustee had breached its duty of disclosure under s21(1)(a) of the Act. 

The critical issue was the meaning of the phrase 'relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk' as it appears in both ss21(1)(a) and 26(2). 

Decision of Chief Justice Hodgson at first instance 
Chief Justice Hodgson held that Permanent Trustee breached its duty of disclosure under s21(1)(a) by failing to inform FAI of its intention not to renew. Based on the finding of fact that FAI would not have granted the extension, if Permanent Trustee had informed it of its intentions, Chief Justice Hodgson ordered that FAI was not liable to Permanent Trustee, but that FAI should repay the amount of the premium to Permanent Trustee.

Decision on appeal

This decision was appealed and the NSW Court of Appeal:
upheld the finding that Permanent Trustee had failed to comply with its duty of disclosure;

held that Mr Welsh had misrepresented the insured's position under section 26(2) by omission, as he knew FAI thought they would be asked to renew the contract and he did not correct that mistaken view; and

found that the knowledge of the broker was the knowledge of Permanent Trustee for the purpose of s21(1)(a) and therefore Permanent Trustee had made a misrepresentation under s26(2).


Decision of the High Court 
By a majority of 3 to 2 (joint judgment of Justices McHugh, Kirby and Callinan with Justices Gummow and Hayne dissenting) the High Court allowed the appeal. The majority decided that Permanent Trustee did not breach its duty of disclosure and did not misrepresent the risk.

What are the insured's obligations when representing a risk to insurers?
The majority said that an insured's disclosure obligations relate only to those matters which the insured knows (or a reasonable person in the circumstance could be expected to know) are relevant to the insurer's assessment of the risk and, if so, on what terms. This decision was based on the interpretation of clauses 21 and 26 of the Act. The majority distinguished between:
those matters that are relevant to the acceptance of the insured risk (such as the nature of the insured's business); and

those matters of a commercial nature (such as whether the insured intended to renew the insurance with that insurer in the future).


The majority decided that the insured was under no obligation to disclose matters falling into the second category. Whether the insured would, at a later date, renew the insurance contract with FAI fell into this second category and was not relevant to the insurance risk that FAI was being asked to accept. Commercial issues might be relevant to whether the insurer wants to enter into the contract. However the Act's disclosure requirements relate only to matters that are relevant to the acceptance of the risk and not to other matters relevant to the entering into the contract. 

Underlying policy 
It appears that there were two considerations underlying the majority's decision.

1. The majority considered that if the insured was obliged to disclose commercial matters, it would impose 'an extraordinarily high burden' upon an insured and indeed the range of commercial considerations that would have to be disclosed would be 'almost boundless'. For instance, the court thought that commercial matters would include an obligation to disclose that the insured was looking for a more competitive quote or a better or different insurance contract. However, the distinction between those matters that are relevant to the risk insured and those matters that are purely relevant to whether the insurer wishes to enter into the contract might be difficult to identify in practice. If insureds are in any doubt, they should consider taking advice.

2. The majority also considered that the purpose of the Act was to ameliorate the pre-existing common law rules on disclosure and concluded that to impose an obligation to disclose commercial matters on the insured would not give the Act its ameliorative effect, but instead 'allow it to be used as a charter for avoidance of claims by insurers'. 

Implications of this decision 
Some insurers might consider that the distinction between matters relevant to accepting the risk and matters relating to entering into the contract is somewhat arbitrary. After all, an insurer accepts a risk by entering into a contract. Further, the Act appears to require disclosure of information relevant to the decision of the insurer to accept the risk, not just relevant to the risk. Commercial matters could be relevant to the insurer's decision. 

The court has now confirmed that commercial matters which may be relevant to the decision of the insurer whether or not to issue the policy but that do not have a bearing on the assessment of the risk, do not have to be disclosed. This is clearly good news for insureds. 

There was further good news for insureds in that the majority also said that clause 21 only requires the insured to disclose matters that it personally knows. Clause 21 does not require the insured to disclose information known only to the broker. This issue was not fully reasoned and was strictly obiter dicta and therefore not binding. However if followed, it could have profound effects on the extent of disclosure required. It has also created a degree of uncertainty about the status of agents' knowledge generally and further litigation can be expected. It is worth highlighting the approach of the dissenting minority. They considered that an insured should be considered to know whatever its agent knows. Indeed, as the minority correctly pointed out, corporations always act through agents (ie its directors). The minority's approach is more rational and is to be preferred. 

The decision in Permanent Trustee v FAI leaves undecided the issue of whether an insured is obliged to respond to questions in a proposal form that expressly address 'commercial matters'. If the insured has no duty to disclose information relating to commercial matters, arguably a proposal form cannot recreate a duty to do so.
"Joint Obligations" Homeowners' Provision Didn't Bar Coverage for "Innocent Insured"
March 2005

A cardinal rule of policy construction is that courts will construe ambiguous policy language in favor of the insured and a finding of coverage. "Ambiguity" is present when policy language is subject to two or more reasonable interpretations. A recent homeowners case demonstrates that this standard is relatively easy for the policyholder to meet, even in the face of what appears to be a "belt and suspenders" approach in the drafting of the policy.

by Richard T. Valentino
O'Hagan, Smith & Amundsen

In Wasik v Allstate Insurance Co., 351 Ill App 3d 260 (2nd Dist 2004), Allstate issued a homeowners insurance policy to Martin Wasik. Among other things, the policy provided first-party coverage for damage to Martin's property. After a fire destroyed his garage and its contents, Martin made a claim under the policy. Allstate denied coverage, asserting that Martin's stepson had intentionally started the fire and, therefore, certain exclusions and provisions of its policy applied to bar coverage. Martin took the position that, because he was an "innocent insured," the acts of his stepson could not be imputed to him to deny coverage.

The Facts
Martin lived in a single-family home with a detached garage. His stepson, William Fort, and his stepson's wife and child, moved into Martin's home a few months before the fire occurred. William had stored his family's furniture, clothing, and other property in the garage. The Fort family had moved into Martin's house when they were facing eviction from their own home and experiencing other financial difficulties.

On the day of the fire, William borrowed lighter fluid from a neighbor, ostensibly for a barbeque. He claimed to have lit the grill and then began doing yard work. Shortly thereafter, he discovered that the garage was on fire and he attempted to put it out with a garden hose. The fire department arrived a short time later and extinguished the fire. According to the fire department report, there was a strong odor of flammable liquid present near a mattress in the garage. The report concluded that the fire was suspicious. Similarly, a fire investigator retained by Allstate examined the garage and concluded that the fire was incendiary, caused by the ignition of a flammable liquid.

The Dispute
William made a claim under the Allstate policy for property damage of $55,000 and Martin made a claim for $8,000. However, William's claim was not at issue in the appeal.

The policy issued by Allstate covered William as an "insured." The policy's general declarations contained a "joint obligations" clause which stated as follows:

The terms of this policy impose joint obligations on persons defined as an insured person. This means that the responsibilities, acts and failures to act of a person defined as an insured person will be binding upon another person defined as an insured person.
The policy's general declarations further stated:

We do not cover any loss or occurrence in which any insured person has concealed or misrepresented any material fact or circumstance.
The policy also contained several exclusions barring coverage for damage to property consisting of or caused by:

7. The failure by any insured person to take all reasonable steps to preserve property when the property is endangered by a cause of loss we cover.

8. Any substantial change or increase in hazard, if changed or increased by any means within the control or knowledge of an insured person.

9. Intentional or criminal acts of or at the direction of any insured person, if the loss that occurs:

may be reasonably expected to result from such acts; or
is the intended result of such acts;
This exclusion applies regardless of whether or not the insured person is actually charged with, or convicted of, a crime.
Allstate claimed that, based on William's alleged intentional act of setting the garage on fire, coupled with misrepresentations made during the course of his examination under oath, coverage was barred, not only for William's claim, but for Martin's as well.

The Ruling
Although the trial court agreed with Allstate, the appellate court reversed. The court found that Allstate's policy did not clearly and unambiguously inform Martin that the policy would be void as to all insureds in the event of misconduct by one insured. Although the policy's terms could be read as entirely prohibiting coverage for a loss caused by the act or failure to act of "any" insured, they did not clearly state that the policy would be void or coverage would be excluded as to all insureds in the event of some improper behavior by "any" insured. Relying on previous decisions of the Illinois Appellate Court, the Wasik court determined that the exclusions did not clearly apply to bar coverage for Martin's claim.

The court also rejected Allstate's argument that the "joint obligations" clause was a basis to distinguish its policy from the policies at issue in earlier cases. The court noted that the "joint obligations" clause was not part of the exclusionary clauses of the policy, but was instead found among the general declarations. One plausible construction of the "joint obligations" clause was that it referred to general obligations to pay premium and take certain actions before and after a loss and that a reasonable insured would not understand the clause to exclude coverage for all insureds when coverage was excluded for one insured.

Precedent
In support of its decision, the court cited with favor decisions from several other jurisdictions.

Utah—Allstate v. Worthington

In Allstate Ins. Co. v. Worthington, 46 F3d 1005 (10th Cir 1995), applying Utah law, a wife underwent a tubal ligation. Her husband did not approve of the procedure and plotted to kill the doctor who had performed it. The wife had removed all of her husband's firearms from the home but, one day, her husband demanded that she return the guns, and she did so. The wife allegedly knew her husband planned to go to the hospital and kill the doctor, but she did not try to warn the doctor or the hospital.

Her husband took the firearms and a bomb to the hospital, where he took hostages and shot and killed a nurse. The nurse's husband and her children brought suit to recover damages for her death. That suit alleged that the wife had "negligently and/or recklessly" breached a duty to warn potential victims of her husband's plan.

Allstate relied on its policy's exclusions and the "joint obligations" clause as bases to deny coverage to both the husband and wife. However, the Worthington court denied relief to Allstate, finding that the exclusions did not "clearly identify whether the intentional act or omission by one insured would preclude coverage for related negligence by another insured." [46 F3d at 1009.] As was the case in Wasik, the Worthington court also rejected Allstate's argument that the "joint obligations" provision removed coverage. Instead, the court found that the provision "refers to obligations to pay premiums, to make timely claims, etc." The court did not believe that a reasonable insured would understand the "joint obligations" provision to exclude liability coverage for all insureds when coverage was excluded for one insured.

Alaska—C.P. v Allstate

Another case cited by the Wasik court is C.P. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 996 P2d 1216 (Alaska 2000). The C.P. case arose from an incident in which the adult son of the homeowners/insureds assaulted a child visiting their home. The child and her parents sued the homeowners, claiming that their negligence was a contributing cause of the child's injuries. The policy excluded coverage for injury resulting from intentional or criminal acts. It also contained a "joint obligations" provision.

The court found that, as to the parents of the assailant, the underlying claim alleged accidental injuries and therefore fell within the definition of "occurrence." The exclusionary provisions of the policy barred coverage for injury resulting from criminal or intentional conduct. The provisions did not expressly exclude injury caused in part by unintentional or noncriminal conduct. The court interpreted the exclusions narrowly, finding that they did not bar coverage for merely negligent insureds. The court also found that the "joint obligations" clause did not clearly apply to the exclusions and, therefore, did not expand the application of the exclusions to bar coverage to insureds who are merely negligent. [996 P2d at 1227.]

Minnesota—Allstate v Steele

The Wasik court also referenced a case in which Allstate prevailed, Allstate Ins. Co. v. Steele, 74 F3d 878 (8th Cir 1996, applying Minnesota law). Steele arose out of an underlying claim of criminal sexual misconduct by a named insured's relative, followed by a claim of negligent supervision against the named insureds. The Tenth Circuit, citing insurer-favorable decisions from several other jurisdictions, relied on the "joint obligations" provision, as well as certain exclusions, in reaching the conclusion that no coverage was available to the merely "negligent" policyholders. [74 F3d at 881.] However, the court described the "joint obligations" provision as a "little mysterious." The Wasik court referred to this description in support of its conclusion that the terms of the policy did not unambiguously bar coverage for the claim of an "innocent insured" such as Martin.

Conclusion
Wasik is yet another example of a cardinal rule of policy construction. The courts will construe ambiguous policy language in favor of the insured and a finding of coverage. "Ambiguity" is present when policy language is subject to two or more reasonable interpretations. Wasik demonstrates that this standard is relatively easy for the policyholder to meet, even in the face of what appears to be a "belt and suspenders" approach in the drafting of Allstate's policy.

An examination of decisions from around the country reveals the courts have not been uniform in their construction of policy language similar to that construed in Wasik. For the policyholder, the divergence in the case law might, in and of itself, be argued to show evidence of the presence of two "reasonable" interpretations of the language and, therefore, ambiguity. From the standpoint of the insurer, Wasik illustrates the importance of setting out exclusionary and limiting language in policies with great specificity, so that it is subject to only a single, reasonable interpretation. This is a concept with broad application in all lines of coverage.

What obligations does a freeholder have to leaseholders?
I am a leaseholder on a flat for which, under the terms of my lease, the freeholder arranges the annual buildings insurance. Since 2008 I have rented out the property and now live abroad, which the freeholder agreed to prior to my organising. However, he has failed to send through any demand for payment of either buildings insurance or ground rent for last year (2009/10) and failed to send a policy schedule for the previous year (2008/09) (which I paid in full), either to myself or the second leaseholder in the block, and has not responded to any letters or queries from us.

We engaged a solicitor at considerable cost who was only successful in gaining a letter from him confirming a policy was in place. What rights do I have to make sure my property is comprehensively insured each year, and that I receive timely insurance and ground rent demands?

To complicate matters, I wish to rent the flat out indefinitely, but the lease says I can only do so for up to three years without a covenant from the landlord, which I doubt he will give. RD

A If the lease says your freeholder is responsible for arranging buildings insurance for the property as a whole, which is normal for a building divided into flats, then the freeholder must arrange insurance. But according to the Leasehold Advisory Service (LAS), where a lease provides for the freeholder to arrange buildings insurance it is usually paid for as part of the service charge rather than as a separate item. Also, the freeholder doesn't automatically send a copy of the insurance document to leaseholders.

However, a freeholder must respond to a written request for a summary of the policy within 21 days of it being made. The summary must show the sum for which the building is insured, the name of the insurer and the risks covered by the policy. If a freeholder fails to provide insurance information, he or she is committing an offence and could potentially be liable for a fine of up to £2,500.

But before you start to take legal action against your landlord I would first ask your tenant whether there is any post for you. Again, according to the LAS a freeholder must issue a notice for payment of ground rent, which may be sent by post to the address of the flat to which it relates. So if you didn't specifically tell your freeholder that you wanted any correspondence sent to your foreign address, he or she may still be sending post to the address of the flat you are letting.

Wherever post is going, I am afraid you can't force the freeholder to send bills when you want them, and nor can you make the freeholder give you the covenant you need to be able to let the flat beyond three years.
What are the obligations of an insurance broker to their client?


An insurance broker has several obligations to her clients. She has to help explain each policy that she is trying to sell to the best of her ability. She also has to avoid misrepresenting any information about an insurance policy or an insurance company. The broker has to utilize the highest standards when engaging in business transactions, and she has to put the needs of her customers ahead of anything else. She does not have any obligation to a particular insurance company, so her role is to work for her client only. Insurance brokers are required to adhere to high ethical standards throughout the process.


This Information is for foreign businesses (employers) not required to be registered under Hungarian law which:

have employees within the framework of a legal relationship subject to insurance obligation in the territory of Hungary or
have employees outside the territory of Hungary governed, on the basis of the Regulation of the European Community on the coordination of  social security systems, by Act LXXX of 1997.
Under Article 5 (3) of Act LXXX of 1997, natural persons who perform their work for a foreign employer outside the territory of Hungary and who are governed by this Act on the basis of the Regulation of the European Community on the coordination of  social security systems, shall also qualify as an insured as of January 1, 2011. 

 

Foreign businesses not required to be registered under Hungarian law (hereinafter: foreign businesses) shall perform the registration, contribution payment, social contribution tax payment and tax returns obligations related to a legal relationship involving an insurance obligation, through a branch office specified under Articles 8 and 9 of Act XCII of 2003, through a financial representative or, lacking these,  directly by themselves.

If the foreign business concerned does not have a branch office or a financial representative and has an employer who is ensured under Hungarian law, they shall, prior to the insurance period and the commencement of the employment, contact the National Tax and Customs Administration of Hungary (hereinafter: authority or NTCA) and ask to be registered with the authority as an employer.

Please find technical guidance for the performance of the obligations through the following link.

I. Registration with NTCA

The foreign business shall meet its registration obligation by requesting a tax number by filling in and submitting form 13T201INT. The form is available through the following link.

Via this form, the business concerned can also inform the authority of the data of the person authorised to perform electronic administration on behalf of the business.

If the foreign business employing a person ensured under Hungarian law does not have a representative (a branch office or a financial representative) for meeting the tax and contribution obligations and fails to register as an employer, it is the natural person employed by this foreign business who shall perform the  registration, contribution payment, social contribution tax and returns obligations related to their insured status and bear the legal consequences of failing to meet these obligations, not including default penalty or tax penalty. Whether or not the foreign business has registered with the authority as an employer can be enquired under the menu item “Data bases, Taxpayer lists, Other organisations” of the following link.

If it is the employee who meets the obligations concerned, he/she is required to have a tax identification number. Private persons can request a tax identification number by submitting to the authority a form 13T34, prior to the registration of the employment or the performance of the contribution payment obligation. The form is available through the following link.

 

II. The registration of ensured persons employed by foreign businesses

The commencement of the employee’s insurance obligation must be reported on the first day of the insurance period at the latest; the termination of the insurance or periods without work performance obligation or income subject to social security must be reported within 8 days. Form 13T1041INT, through which registration or reporting changes can be made, can be downloaded from the following link.

III. Performance of contribution payment obligation

In compliance with 56/A of Act LXXX of 1997, income subject to contribution payment, paid to an employee performing work for a foreign business within the framework of a legal relationship subject to insurance obligation, shall be subject to the payment of pension contribution, health insurance and labour market contribution, to be established and deducted by the employer.

The following, among others, shall qualify as income subject to contribution payment: the part of the income from employment or self-employment constituting the consolidated tax base considered for calculating the tax advance base under Act CXVII of 1995 on personal income tax (hereinafter: PIT Act) or, lacking that, i.e. if the income is non-taxable in Hungary, the base salary specified in the employment contract or, if the work is performed in the framework of a work relationship rather than an employment relationship, the fee specified in the contract.

The income forming the contribution base is burdened by 10% pension contribution and  8.5 % health insurance and labour market contribution. Within the health insurance and labour market contribution, the in-kind health insurance contribution is 4%, the in-cash health insurance contribution is 3% and the labour market contribution is 1.5%.

It is thus 18.5% of the income subject to contribution payment that is paid to cover pension, health insurance and unemployment benefits.

As an important change, the ceiling of contribution payment was cancelled as of January 1, 2013. This means that pension contributions must be established on the basis of the total amount of the income subject to contribution payment.

At the same time, Act LXXX of 1997 and Government Decree 195/1997 (XI.5.) on the implementation of the latter have temporary regulations. Thus, with reference to income received by January 10, 2013 and forming the contribution base of December 2012 that must be declared in the return referring to December 2012, payment obligations must be performed in compliance with the regulations on the contribution payment ceiling valid on December 31, 2012. On the other hand, income paid after the due date (outstanding income) or paid for the period prior to January 1, 2013, based on an enforceable court order and subject to contribution payment, must be considered, up to the contribution payment ceiling, for the year (period) for which year (period) it was paid.  

IV. Social contribution tax payment obligation

In compliance with Act CLVI of 2011 on the Amendment of Tax Laws and other Related Regulations, payers shall have, as of January 1, 2012, in accordance with their obligation to contribute to the financing of common societal needs, social contribution tax payment obligation.  

Considering social contribution tax payment, payers without a permanent residence, habitual residence or seat in Hungary (hereinafter: foreign payers) shall also qualify as payers (taxpayers) if natural persons subject to Hungarian social security legislation having a legal relationship with these payers, generating tax payment obligation, perform their work in Hungary or any other Member State subject to the Regulation of the European Community on the coordination of  social security systems.

If the foreign payer fails to meet their legal obligations, it is the natural persons having a legal relationship with the foreign payer that generates tax payment obligation who shall meet the related tax obligations.   

Meeting the tax payment obligation

As a main rule, payers shall pay  27% social contribution tax  for the tax base but are granted the opportunity by the law to reduce the amount of the tax payable by the amount of the tax incentives they are entitled to.

The base of the tax to be paid by payer

The base of the tax to be paid by payer is the part of the income, taxable under the PIT Act, from work or employment relationship, provided or paid by payer to the natural person having a legal relationship with payer generating a taxation obligation, considered under the provisions of the PIT Act for the calculation of the tax advance base, plus the amount deducted (paid) as the membership fee for the organ performing employees’ interest representation.    

Lacking remuneration like the above, i.e. if the income is not taxable in Hungary, the tax base shall be the base salary or payment specified in the employment contract or other contract governing the employment relationship or other legal relationship subject to tax payment obligation.

In compliance with a new provision that took effect as of January 1, 2013, if a payer pays (or provides) to a natural person with whom payer has a legal relationship subject to tax payment obligation income for the same tax period both taxable and non-taxable in the territory of Hungary, the above rules shall be applied together when establishing the tax base. Thus, the base of the tax to be paid by payer shall be the income from work or employment relationship taxable in the territory of Hungary, provided or paid to the natural person, that is considered for the calculation of the tax base, as well as the proportionate part of the base salary or other remuneration for the period (calendar days) for which the income is taxable abroad.

V. Declaration and payment

The declaration and data reporting obligation related to the insurance, contribution payment and social contribution tax payment obligations shall be performed electronically (through a Client Gate) on a monthly basis, by the 12th day of the month following the subject month.

Form 1308INT to be used for filing declarations can be downloaded from the following link.

 

Contribution payment shall be made in one lump sum to the account of NTCA  Külföldi vállalkozásnál biztosítási kötelezettséggel járó jogviszonyban foglalkoztatott utáni járulék befizetések beszedési számla (“Contributions for employees employed by foreign businesses in a legal relationship involving insurance obligation”)  No. 10032000-06056456, while the social contribution tax shall be paid to the NTCA account Szociális hozzájárulási adó beszedési számla (“Social contribution tax account”) No. 10032000-06055912, on a monthly basis, by the 12th day of the month following the subject month, by transfer or bill payment.  

If payment is made by transfer, please enter the tax identification number that you received when registering under the section “Notes to beneficiary” of the transfer order. This is necessary so as to ensure that the payment be duly credited to the account.        

 

VI. Electronic administration (Client Gate)

The declaration and data provision obligations related to the contribution and social contribution tax payment obligation shall be performed through the Client Gate accessible from the Government Portal (http://www.magyarorszag.hu). The Client Gate is an access point through which Hungarian public administration organs and public institutions providing electronic administration and services can be accessed through a safe, individual identification system.  

You can set up a Client Gate after registration only. Registration must be performed by the private individual  who will submit the declarations and the data to be provided to the authority. This private individual shall personally visit the organ entitled to carry out Client Gate registration, where, after presenting their personal identification document, filling in a Registration Data Sheet and providing a user name and an existing e-mail address, they shall be given an activation code for a single use.   

Client Gate registration can be performed at the Central Office of Public Administration and Electronic Public Services (KEK), at the government client services operated by Budapest Government Office and the county government offices, at the district offices of Budapest Government Office and the county government offices,  at the central customer offices of the National Tax and Customs Administration at the county seats and in Budapest ( Vaskapu u. 33-35, 1096 Budapest; Dózsa György út 128-130, 1134 Budapest; Gvadányi u. 69, 1144 Budapest;  Kresz Géza u. 15, 1132 Budapest), as well as at the diplomatic and consular missions accredited to Hungary.  
DEFINITION OF 'INSURANCE COVERAGE'
The amount of risk or liability covered for an individual or entity by way of insurance services. Insurance coverage is issued by an insurer in the event of an unforeseen or unwanted occurrences. There are general different types of insurance coverage, such as auto or life or more exotic forms such as hole-in-one insurance.

INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'INSURANCE COVERAGE'
The amount of insurance coverage an individual or entity will have is determined by multiple factors, however when boiled down it comes down to the probability of the insured event actually occurring. For example, most insurers will charge higher premiums for young male drivers as they deem the probability of them being involved in accident to be higher than say, a middle-aged married man with years of driving experience.
Each state has specific laws that outline the types and amount of auto insurance you're required to have. Your coverage requirements might be different depending on where you live and what your personal insurance needs are. An agent can help you understand your state's insurance requirements so you can make an educated decision about the coverage levels and deductibles you want. In addition to agent assistance, our tools & resources will provide you with 24/7 access to safety tips and detailed information to help you better understand insurance.
Coverage Centered Around You.

Your state's required minimums may not be enough to best protect you, your family and your car. That's why you can adjust your limits and deductibles- the basic building blocks of any policy-to fit your needs.

Find an agent to learn more about the following coverage types:

Collision: Covers expenses related to the damage or destruction of your vehicle that's been in an accident.
Comprehensive: Covers expenses related to the damage or destruction of your vehicle in situations like thefts or storms.
Liability: When an accident is your fault, bodily injury liability covers expenses related to the injury or death of another driver or a pedestrian, and property damage liability covers expenses related to the damage of another person's property-like vehicles, homes, buildings and other structures.
Medical payments: If you and/or your passengers are hurt in an accident, this can help cover your medical or funeral expenses.
Personal injury protection: If you and/or your passengers are hurt in an accident, this can help cover medical expenses plus related expenses like income continuation.
Uninsured & underinsured motorist: Covers medical expenses and/or repair bills if you're in an accident, the other driver is at fault and doesn't have any (or doesn't have enough) insurance.
Personal umbrella policy: Offers protection against liability claims or judgments, kicking in when your auto insurance liability limits have already been reached.
Rental reimbursement: Helps cover the cost of renting a car if your vehicle is in the shop because of an accident covered under your policy.
Sound system: Covers the cost of replacing stolen or damaged audio and/or video equipment.
Towing & labor: Covers the cost of common roadside services like tire changes and jump-starts.
Find an agent for more information about auto insurance coverage types.

Watch videos about common types of insurance coverage.

How Much Auto Insurance Do You Need?

Bumper-to-Bumper Basics® can help you determine the limits and deductibles that are right for you. It's a great tool for starting a conversation with an agent about the coverage levels you want.

Learn about coverage levels

Insurance, coverage and discounts are subsequent to terms, conditions & agreements, which may vary by state. Discount amounts and total savings will vary.
Liability Coverage
How are you covered in case of an accident?

You were distracted while backing out of a parking space and didn't see the car behind you until it was too late. You hit the car and you crashed through a fence, too. Everyone in the other car seems fine, but the other driver and his passengers go to the emergency room just to make sure.

Liability Coverage pays damages due to bodily injury and property damages to others for which you are responsible. If you're sued, it also pays your defense and court costs. Medical expenses, pain and suffering, and lost wages are some examples of what Liability Bodily Injury may cover. Liability Property Damage covers damage to property and loss of its use.

How much coverage do you need?

Every state sets a minimum coverage level. Selecting more than the minimum coverage would increase your cost now but potentially give you more protection in case of an accident. Since it's impossible to know the most you'd have to pay if you were to cause an accident that resulted in bodily injury or property damage, be sure to take some time and consider whether you'd be able to afford any damages that exceed your auto insurance coverage. The higher your limits, the more likely it is that we'll be able to pay all of the damages for you. Limits higher than the state minimum might be the best choice for you.
Medical Payments Coverage
How are you covered in case of an accident?

You were stopped at a red light when another car hit yours. You were injured. Medical Payments Coverage will pay reasonable and necessary medical and funeral expenses for covered persons.

How much coverage do you need?

The coverage is not required by most states, but it provides great coverage at an affordable price. The cost will correspond to the limits you select. There are no deductibles or copays, so this coverage can pay from the first dollar of incurred, covered expenses.
Collision Coverage
How are you covered in case of an accident?

It's only a fender-bender, but the cost of the headlight, a new bumper, and a paint job can add up quickly. Collision Coverage will pay for damage to a covered vehicle caused by the following, subject to a deductible:

Collision with another vehicle
Collision with an object
A vehicle rollover
How high should your deductible be?

Higher deductibles lower your premium but increase the amount you'll have to pay out of your own pocket at the time of a loss. Ask yourself how much you're willing to pay when a loss occurs to save money on premiums.
How are you covered in case of an accident?

Who'd have thought that little hailstones could do so much damage? Your car is covered with dozens of dents. This comprehensive coverage helps pay for loss of or damage to an insured vehicle, not caused by a collision or vehicle rollover. Typically, that's coverage for the following, and it may be subject to a deductible.

Fire
Wind
Hail
Flood
Vandalism
Theft
Hitting an animal
How high should your deductible be?

Higher deductibles lower your premium but increase the amount you'll have to pay out of your own pocket in case of a loss. Ask yourself how much you're willing to pay when a loss occurs to save money on premiums.
How are you covered in case of an accident?

It's a sad fact: There are people who drive without any liability insurance. What if you're injured in an accident caused by one of these drivers? Uninsured Motorist Coverage will pay for damages when you are injured in a car accident caused by another person who does not have sufficient liability insurance. Medical expenses, pain and suffering, and lost wages are some examples of bodily injury damages.

Should you get this coverage?

Doing so lets you decide how much auto insurance coverage is potentially available to pay for your covered damages when you are in an accident caused by an uninsured motor vehicle.
How are you covered in case of an accident?

Many drivers carry low limits of liability coverage. What if you're injured in an accident caused by an underinsured driver? Underinsured Vehicle Coverage will pay for damages when you are injured in a car accident caused by another person who does not have sufficient liability insurance. Medical expenses, pain and suffering, and lost wages are some examples of bodily injury damages.

Should you get this coverage?

Doing so lets you decide how much auto insurance coverage is available for your covered damages when you are in an accident caused by an underinsured motor vehicle.
Car Rental and Travel Expenses Coverage
How are you covered in case of an accident?

Your car is in the shop after a collision. Rental Reimbursement pays the cost of renting a replacement vehicle so you don't have to interrupt your daily routine. Daily allowances or limits vary by state.

Should you get this coverage?

Consider how you'd get to work, school, or the store if your car were out of commission. If you depend on having a car available, could you afford to pay for a rental car yourself without this auto insurance coverage?
Emergency Road Service
How are you covered?

Emergency Road Service provides towing your vehicle to a repair facility, mechanical labor at the place of breakdown when your vehicle becomes disabled, pulling your vehicle out of a location where it is stuck, delivery of gas or oil, assistance with changing a tire, a jumpstart and locksmith services. You can call 877-627-5757 for roadside assistance.

If you have Coverage H (Emergency Road Service), you will not bear the up-front financial burden as State Farm will be billed directly for basic service. If you do not have Coverage H, you will need to pay for the services but will do so at a competitive rate negotiated by State Farm. This rate will usually be less than what is available in the market. If you pay for the services, you can submit the receipt to your agent for reimbursement consideration. Coverage limits vary by state.

Should you get this coverage?

Consider how much you could afford to pay out of your own pocket if you were stranded without this auto insurance coverage.
About Health Insurance
Understanding health insurance plans can be confusing to most consumers. Many don't know where to look or whom to contact for information on the coverage of speech-language pathology services, audiology services and hearing aids, let alone how to interpret the coverage guidelines. ASHA has developed this site to help you, as a consumer, understand your health plan as well as provide further contacts to assist you in understanding and obtaining the coverage you need to receive speech and hearing services.

Types of Health Plans
In order to understand your health care coverage, you must first be able to identify what type of health plan you may have. There are 3 different health plans available to consumers:

Private Health Plans are the most common. These are health plans offered by employers to their employees. They can also be purchased by an individual.

Medicaid is government funded health care, typically provided for low-income individuals and families.

Medicare is government funded health care, typically provided for individuals ages 65 and over.

Alternative Sources for Health Care Assistance
If you don't have coverage for speech and hearing services, there are other alternative sources for health care assistance:

Schools - Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is the landmark law that provides federal funding for all children with disabilities and will allow your child to receive these services through their public school.

Hearing - There are numerous organizations and programs available to assist with costs related to audiology services and hearing aids.

Speech/Language - There are numerous organizations and programs available to assist with costs related to speech-language pathology services and assistive technology.

Additional Tools
Remember, consumers do have a say in their health insurance plans. To learn more about how to influence change in your plan check out the additional tools below:

Brochure: Making Sense of your Health Insurance Plan [PDF] - Use this as a quick guide to understanding your health insurance

Employer Insurance Packet - Talk to your employers about adequate private health insurance coverage

Adding Speech, Language, and Hearing Benefits to Your Policy - Tell your employers to check this page out to get the answers they need about adding valuable speech, language, and hearing benefits to your current insurance policy

Legislating Health Plan Coverage for: Hearing Aids for Children, Cognitive Rehabilitation, and Autism Related Services - Learn how to become an advocate for improved coverage at the state level.

ASHA's "Model Benefits" for Services - Learn about ideal health plan coverage for speech and hearing services

Health Savings Accounts: Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology Coverage [PDF] (flyer) - Learn how you can get speech, language, and hearing services covered through a Health Savings Account

Advocate for Better Coverage - Contact policymakers about private health insurance, Medicare, or Medicaid coverage
Health Savings Accounts
and Speech-Language Pathology Coverage
The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) prepared this overview to help those
families and individuals who have a health savings account (HSA) understand how it covers services
provided by speech-language pathologists.
HSAs are savings accounts into which individuals deposit money and then withdraw it tax-free for eligible
medical expenses. These accounts were implemented in 2004 through a change in the Internal Revenue
Code to allow an individual to deduct HSA contributions. HSAs require a high-deductible health plan
(HDHP)—a plan that features higher annual deductibles than other traditional health plans. Those who
hold HSAs are responsible for researching health coverage options and keeping careful track of their
financial and medical records.
 HSA funds can be used for a wide range of medical services—for example: routine doctors’
appointments and prescriptions; over-the-counter medicines; weight-loss programs; smoking
cessation programs; and chiropractic care.
 Covered expenditures include medical costs that may not be included in some standard health
insurance contracts but are considered tax deductible medical expenses by the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS).
 The IRS has specifically deemed the following expenses to be included in their definition1

Therapy received as a medical treatment
Special education expenses paid on a doctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by
a teacher who is specially trained and qualified to work with children who have learning
disabilities caused by mental or physical impairments
 The HSA for America Web site lists dyslexia language training as an expense deemed qualified by
the IRS or federal courts.
 Professional services received from a speech-language pathologist should be included with these
definitions. These services could be for medically necessary services for disorders related to
speech and language development, voice, stuttering, aphasia due to a stroke, and swallowing.
 You should check with your HSA carrier to be sure that the services are covered.
 You should check with your HDHP carrier to be sure that the services count for the deductible under the plan.

Health Savings Accounts
and Audiology Coverage
The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) prepared this overview to help those
families and individuals who have a health savings account (HSA) understand how it covers services
provided by audiologists.
HSAs are savings accounts into which individuals deposit money and then withdraw it tax-free for
eligible medical expenses. These accounts were implemented in 2004 through a change in the Internal
Revenue Code to allow an individual to deduct HSA contributions. HSAs require a high-deductible
health plan (HDHP)—a plan that features higher annual deductibles than other traditional health plans.
Those who hold HSAs are responsible for researching health coverage options and keeping careful track
of their financial and medical records.
 HSA funds can be used for a wide range of medical services—for example: routine doctors’
appointments and prescriptions, over-the-counter medicines, weight-loss programs, smoking
cessation programs, and chiropractic care.
 Covered expenditures include medical costs that may not be included in some standard health
insurance contracts but are considered tax deductible medical expenses by the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS).
 The IRS has specifically deemed the following expenses to be included in their definition2

 Medical services provided by physicians, surgeons, specialists, or other medical
practitioners
 Hearing aids and hearing aid batteries
Professional services received from an audiologist should be included with these definitions.
 The IRS Publication 907, Tax Highlights for Persons with Disabilities, states that the following are
medical expenses that are covered:
 Hearing aids
 Cost and repair of special telephone equipment for hearing-impaired persons
 Cost and care of a guide dog aiding a person with a physical disability
 You should check with your HSA carrier to be sure that the services are covered.
 You should check with your HDHP carrier to be sure that the services count for the deductible
under the plan.
Did you know?
 Hearing loss is the number one birth defect in the United States.
 Two out of every 10 children will have some type of speech or hearing disorder.
 Half of the 28 million Americans with hearing disorders are under the age of 50.
Each year 1 million Americans suffer brain damage from strokes, accidents, or brain
tumors that result in the loss of speaking, reading, and writing abilities.
At some point in your life, you may need to seek speech/language or hearing services for
yourself or a loved one.
Take the time now to find out what speech/language and hearing services your health
insurance plan covers. This brochure outlines how health insurance plan benefits differ
and helps you identify and evaluate the speech/language, and hearing benefits covered
by your plan.
Don’t wait for a crisis to find out if these vital services are
included in your health insurance plan!
Where do I start?
Obtain the comprehensive explanation of health benefits (usually a thick book) from your
employer and find the section that describes speech/language, and hearing benefits.
Look for sections such as:
 Speech Therapy or Speech-Language Pathology or Speech Pathology
 Speech and Language Benefits
 Hearing Care
 Hearing Benefits
 Audiology
If you don’t see these sections, look under Rehabilitation Services, Physical Therapy
and Other Rehabilitation Services, or Other Medically Necessary Services or Therapies.
Hearing services may be listed in a completely different section such as Diagnostic
Services.
When you find the sections, make sure that both testing and treatment are covered for
both speech/language and hearing disorders. You should also look for coverage of hearing
aids, other amplifying devices, cochlear implants, communication (speech-generating)
devices, and voice devices.
How can I find out what services or devices are excluded?
Look for separate sections labeled Things We Don’t Cover, Exclusions to Coverage, or Charges Covered with Special Limitations.
Beware of benefits that apply only to speech/language problems that result from illness or injury. Speech/language problems from birth would not be covered.
For benefits for spouses or children, look for any special sections labeled
Dependent Coverage.
When in doubt, check it out! If you’re unsure about your plan’s coverage of speech/language or hearing services, contact your employer or ask the health plan to clarifyyour coverage in writing.
How will I know if my benefits are adequate?
For speech/language benefits, a comprehensive plan will:
 provide benefits for all necessary speech/language services without excluding
specific kinds of problems,
 pay 100% of allowable charges,
 pay for at least a significant portion of needed devices,
 not impose a pre-set limit on the number of reimbursable therapy sessions,
not impose a yearly or lifetime limit on benefits, and
 provide access to a sufficient number of local speech-language pathologists.
For hearing benefits, a comprehensive plan will:
cover routine hearing tests and treatment for any reason,
 allow you to see an audiologist without first seeing a physician,
pay for evaluation and follow-up audiologic rehabilitation services for hearing
aids, other amplification devices, and cochlear implants,
 pay 100% of allowable charges without a maximum number of visits or a yearly
or lifetime limit,
pay for at least a significant portion of the cost of hearing aids and other
amplification devices,
cover cochlear implants as a medical benefit, and
provide access to a sufficient number of local audiologists.
What about other limitations?
Other limitations may include:
a maximum number of therapy visits even if the provider indicates that additional
sessions are needed,
a maximum yearly or lifetime benefit, and/or
 a statement by a physician that services are medically necessary.
Some plans restrict you to the plan’s provider network. Review the list of audiologists and
speech-language pathologists in the plan’s network to be sure that there are a sufficient
number of local providers.
How much will my plan pay?
Some plans cover 100% of the fee charged for a particular service but some may pay only
a portion (e.g., 70% or 80%). Some plans require a small co-payment. Some plans pay a
different percentage for in-network versus out-of-network providers. Check the summary of
benefits for this information.
What can I do if my benefits are inadequate?
During your employer ‘s next Open Enrollment period, use the ASHA report cards to
compare the speech/language and hearing benefits in all of the plans being offered.
Choose the plan that best meets your needs, and write to your old plan and tell them why
you dropped them.
In the meantime:
Urge your employer to enhance its current health insurance plan. Consider
expressing your thoughts in a letter to your company.
Contact your state legislator and request comprehensive coverage of these services in all health insurance plans issued in the state.
Request a copy of ASHA’s Employer Insurance Packet, to help you prepare to discuss coverage of speech, language, and hearing services. Call the ASHA Action Center at 1-800-638-8255 to obtain a copy. 
Loss in insurance
LOSS IN INSURANCE, contracts. A loss is the injury or damage sustained by the insured in consequence of the happening of one or more of the accidents or misfortunes against which the insurer, in consideration of the premium, has undertaken to indemnify the insured. 1 Bouv. Inst. n. 1215. 
     2. These accidents or misfortunes, or perils, as they are usually denominated, are all distinctly enumerated in the policy. And no loss, however great or unforeseen, can be a loss with the policy, unless it be the direct and immediate consequence of one or more of these perils, Marsh. Ins. B, 1, c. 12. As to the risks which are within the common policy, see Marsh. Ins. c. 7, s. 2. 
     3. Every loss is either total or partial. 
     4. The term total loss is understood in two different senses; natural and legal. In its natural sense it signifies the complete and absolute destruction of the thing inured. In its legal sense, it means, not merely the entire destruction or deprivation of the thing insured, but also such damage to it, though it specifically remain, as renders it of little or no value to the owner. A loss is also deemed total, if, by the happening of any of the perils or misfortunes insured against, the voyage be lost, or be not worth pursuing, and the projected adventure be frustrated; or if the value of what he saved, be less than the freight. See Dougl. 231; 1 T. R. 608; Id. 187; Str. 1065; 13 East, R. 323; 2 M. & S 374 1 N. R. 236; 1 Wils. 191; 4 T. R. 785 9 East, R. 283; 3 B. & P. 388; Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12; 1 T. R. 187. 
     5. A partial loss, is any loss or damage short of, or not amounting to a total loss, for if it be not the latter it must be the former. See 4 Mass. 374; 6 Mass. 102; Id, 122; Id. 317; 7 Mass. 349; 9 Mass. 20; 12 Mass. 170; 12 Mass. 288; 6 Mass. 479; 8 Mass. 494; 10 Johns. Rep. 487; 8 Johns. 237; 5 Binn. 595; 2 Serg. & Rawle, 553. 
     6. Partial losses are sometimes denominated average losses, because they are often in the nature of those losses which are the subject of average contributions; and they are distinguished into general and particular averages. See tit. Average. 
     7. Losses are occasioned in a variety of ways but most usually by the following: 1. By perils of the sea. See tit. Perils of the Sea. 2. By collision, as where one ship drives against, or runs foul of another. Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12, s. 2. 3. By fire. Marsh. B. 1, c. 12, s. 3. 4. By capture. See tit. Capture; Marsh. Ins. B. 1. c. 12, s. 4; 2 Caines' C. Err. 158; 7 Johns. R. 449; 13 Johns. R. 161; 14 Johns. R. 227; 3 Wheat. 183; 4 Cranch, 43; 6 Mass. 197. 5. By detention of princes. By the terms of the policy, the insurer is liable for all loss occasioned by "arrest or detainments of all kings, princes, and people, of what nation, condition, or quality soever." Under these words, the insurers are liable for all losses occasioned by arrests or detention of the ship, or goods insured, by the authority of any prince or public body claiming to exercise sovereign power, under what pretence soever. Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12, s. 5. See Embargo; People. 6. By Barratry. Marsh. Ills. B. 1, c. 12, s. 6. See tit. Barratry; 2 Caines' R. 67; Id. 222; 3 Caines' Rep. 1; 1 Johns. R. 229; 8 Johns. R. 209, 2d edit.; 5 Day, 1; 11 Johns. Rep. 40; 13 Johns. Rep. 451; 2 Binn. 574; 2 Dall. 137; 8 Cranch, 39; 3 Wheat. 168. 7. By average by contribution. See Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12, s. 7; this Dict. tit. Average. 8., By salvage. See tit. Salvage; Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12, s. 8. 9. By the death of animals. If animals, such as horses, cattle, or beasts or birds of curiosity, be insured in their passage by sea, their death, occasioned by tempests, by the shot of an enemy, by jettison in a storm, or by any other extraordinary accident, occasioned by the perils enumerated in the policy, is a loss for which the underwriters are liable. Not so, if it be occasioned by mere disease or natural death. Marsh. Ins. B. 1, c. 12, s. 10. 10. 
In health insurance, a stop loss policy is a policy that takes effect after a certain amount has been paid in claims. Companies providing health insurance for their employees through a self-insured plan often subscribe to stop loss policies in order to protect themselves against catastrophic claims. The organization which takes the insurance policy is called the insured and the employees and other people who are covered through the policy are called participants. Most of the time there is an annual limit for the stop loss amount for each participant and an aggregate amount for each policy year. The premium is calculated for each employee for each month. The premium is based on the number of participants, age of the participants and various other information.

Insurance losses by make and model
The tables below contain results for hundreds of passenger vehicles grouped by class and size under six insurance coverages: collision, property damage liability, comprehensive, personal injury protection, medical payment and bodily injury.
About these numbers
All results are stated in relative terms, with 100 representing the average for all vehicles under a given coverage type. For example, a result of 122 is 22 percent worse than average, and 96 is 4 percent better than average. The colors also indicate how each model compares with all other vehicles.

Vehicles are displayed with others from the same size and class. Similar models can generally be expected to have similar losses. These tables help consumers identify vehicles whose results are substantially better or worse than others like them.

Results for collision, property damage liability and comprehensive represent overall losses, which reflect both the frequency of claims and the average loss payment per claim. Results for injury coverages represent claim frequency only. Included claims date from the first sales of a vehicle through the beginning of the calendar year that follows the last year in the model year spread. For example, data for 2011-13 models include losses through early 2014.

The results are adjusted to reduce possible distortions from other nonvehicle factors — operator age, calendar year, density, gender, marital status, model year, risk (standard or nonstandard) and state. Collision and comprehensive also are adjusted for deductible amount.

These insurance loss results generally are good predictors of the experience of current versions of the same vehicle models. However, when automakers substantially redesign their vehicles, the experience of an earlier model with the same name may not predict the experience of the newer design.

Why can't I find insurance loss data for new models?
It takes considerable time to gather and tabulate the real-world data needed to provide statistically significant results for new models. Complete vehicle registration data for each model year typically are released about two years later, and data on fatalities are first available approximately nine months after the end of the calendar year. Similarly, it takes time to amass sufficient insurance claims information to provide meaningful results for a range of vehicles. For vehicles that have not been fundamentally redesigned, previous model year results are good predictors of the current model's experience.
The first policy that claims are submitted to for a loss, before any other policy that covers the same peril. This term can also mean a policy written for an amount that covers the anticipated loss during the policy term.
LOSS OF USE COVERAGE
Loss of use coverage generally provides protection when a residence cannot be lived in
because of an insured loss. Coverage terms vary among insurers, and it is important to
review your policy and call your insurer or agent with any questions. The three
coverages are called: 1) additional living expense, 2) fair rental value and, in most
states, 3) prohibited use. The limit of liability for loss of use shown on the declarations
page is the total aggregate limit for these three benefits.
Additional Living Expense - If a covered loss results in the residence premises being
unfit to live in, the insurer will cover any necessary increase in living expenses to allow
the household to maintain its “normal standard of living.” The payment will be for the
least amount of time necessary to repair or replace the damage or, if the named insured
has to permanently relocate, the least amount of time required for the household to
settle at another location.
? For example, assume a house has been partially damaged in a fire. Because of
the extensive damage, the policyholder is forced to move to a rental apartment
on a temporary basis. Their rent is $1,400 per month, which is in addition to the
policyholder’s $1,100 mortgage payment, which she will continue to pay. Thus,
the $1,400 in rent would be considered additional living expenses. If the
policyholder’s food costs averaged a little higher than they were before the fire,
this additional amount would be covered as well.
One key question is “what is the normal standard of living”? If the policyholder rented a
home with 1,000 more square feet than her current home, the insurer typically would not
pay this additional charge. The insurer would insist on a comparable residence to the
one damaged, if a comparable residence is available. In addition, any expenses that
decrease as a result of the loss, such as utility expenses, would be subtracted from the
additional charges.
Note that this coverage is only payable if the damage was caused by an insured peril. If
the house was uninhabitable due to a flood, a peril typically excluded by a homeowners
policy, no loss of use coverage would apply. And, federal flood insurance specifically
excludes additional living expense coverage.
Another important point concerns the time necessary to repair or replace the damage.
For example, if the home is repaired within six weeks, and the policyholder
unnecessarily delays in moving out of the rented accommodations, the extra rent due to
this delay would not be covered.
Fair Rental Value - If a covered loss renders portions of the premises that are rented to
others uninhabitable, the insurer will cover the fair rental value of such premises. 
However, any expenses that will not continue or that are reduced while the home is
uninhabitable will be subtracted from the additional expenses. The payment will be for
the least amount of time necessary to repair or replace that part of the premises rented
to others.
? For example, assume the policyholder owns a large home and rents out one of
the rooms for $400 per month, which includes utilities. A fire renders the entire
house, including the rented room, unfit to live in. The insurer will cover the rental
value less any expenses that do not continue (e.g., electricity) while the damage
is being repaired. Suppose it takes two months to repair the damage. If the
tenant’s utility share is usually $30 per month, then the insurer would pay $370
($400 - $30) x 2 months = $740.
The time necessary to repair or replace the damage is a key factor. If the home is
determined to be repairable within two months, and the policyholder unnecessarily
causes delays in the start-up construction resulting in a two-week lag, the insurer would
not cover the extra two-week rental value.
Again, note that this coverage is only payable if the damage was caused by an insured
peril. If the house were uninhabitable due to a flood, a peril typically excluded by a
homeowners policy, no loss of use coverage would apply.
Prohibited Use - A civil authority, such as a federal, state, or local government agency
or the state police, can prohibit residents from accessing their undamaged homes in a
damaged neighborhood or community. (A civil authority could include any federal, state,
or local governmental agency.) It is important to remember that an order to evacuate in
anticipation of a disaster does not, in and of itself, trigger this coverage. The coverage
would not be triggered until there is actual physical damage to the neighboring
properties. Some homeowners insurance policies cover the policyholder’s resulting
additional living expenses and rents or rental value loss under a “prohibited use”
provision. This protection is typically good for up to 2 weeks.
This coverage would apply as a result of damage to the surrounding premises, even
though the policyholder’s own home may be undamaged.
For example, suppose the policyholder’s home is located in a subdivision that
experienced extensive loss from a tornado. Numerous homes were destroyed,
but the policyholder’s home suffered no damage, and it is habitable. However,
the extensive damage to the subdivision resulted in the government cordoning off
the area for 24 hours. The policyholder’s hotel bill, restaurant charges, and
miscellaneous expenses for this short period of time would be provided if the
policyholder has “loss of use” coverage.
Expenses Not Covered - The insurer will not provide coverage for any loss or expense
as the result of a cancellation of a lease or agreement. The policyholder could suffer a
loss if the tenant’s lease was canceled as a result of the property being unfit to live in, particularly if the lease agreement stipulated this was allowable under these
circumstances.
? For example, assume a fire damaged the policyholder’s home, rendering it
uninhabitable. As a result, the policyholder’s tenant moved out and canceled the
lease, and it took the policyholder an additional two months after repairs were
completed to find another tenant. The homeowners insurance policy will not
provide coverage for these two months of lost rental revenue. It only provides
coverage for the time until the repairs were completed would be covered under
loss of use.
Finally, the loss of use coverage provided survives the expiration of the policy. For
example, assume the homeowners insurance policy with insurer A expires on
December 15, and was replaced by an identical policy from insurer B. A large fire loss
on December 11 renders the house uninhabitable for two months. Because the
covered loss occurred while insurer A’s policy was in force, loss of use coverage will
continue under this policy, and not under insurer B’s policy.
Again, this paper describes loss of use coverage in a general sense. It is critical that
you read your policy and contact your insurer or agent with any questions.
Almost half the homes deemed at serious risk from flooding will not be covered under the government's new flood insurance scheme because officials have decided to omit the future impact of climate change.

As the cleanup continues on coastlines inundated by the worst tidal surge for 60 years, it has emerged that the government's flood insurance deal, Flood Re, is likely to cover just 500,000 homes.

Yet the government's owncomprehensive Climate Change Impact Assessment reveals that, when factoring in climate change and population growth, the true figure of homes considered to be at significant risk during the 2020s will be 970,000.

Despite its own dire predictions on the potential impact of climate change, the government's impact assessment for Flood Re does not take account of "changing flood risk due to deterioration of existing flood defences [or] climate change".

Details of Flood Re are being debated by a bill committee of MPs with specific clauses to be considered this week.

Initial assessments of the damage caused by Thursday's surge indicates that 1,400 properties were flooded and up to 15,000 people had to leave their homes.

On Saturday Owen Paterson, the environment secretary, visited some of the worst-affected communities in eastern England, including Hull and Boston, where many were still waiting to return to their homes.

Meanwhile, insurers are braced for new claims over damage to homes and businesses, two months after storms in southern England led to payouts of £130m.

Yet the fact that the damage was less extensive than feared has led to praise for improved flood defences, with experts estimating they may have protected up to 800,000 properties.

Their success has underscored the frustration of campaigners who maintain that not including climate change as a factor in the impact of flooding is both short-sighted and irresponsible.

Guy Shrubsole, Friends of the Earth climate campaigner, said: "Following th=e devastating damage caused by the biggest storm surge across the east coast in the past 60 years, it's unforgivable that the government's future flood insurance plan excludes consideration of climate change.

"Its own figures show that global warming will put tens of thousands more British homes at risk of flooding in future.

"The environment secretary must stop playing Russian roulette with people's homes and livelihoods through his cavalier approach to flood risk."

The Flood Re scheme allows for the environment secretary to set a target number of homes to be covered by the insurance scheme, with the likely figure set to be 500,000 properties.

Projections clearly show that climate change is set to dramatically increase flood risk. The government's own figures show that over the next 15 years alone a million more people could be put at significant risk because of climate change.

Friends of the Earth is campaigning for Flood Re to ensure the evidence of increased risks generated by climate change are explicitly factored into the scheme and is concerned that the government has excluded consideration of existing and future climate change impacts from the design of the scheme.
What is a Risk Pool?

Health insurance risk pools are special programs created by state legislatures to provide a safety net for the "medically uninsurable" population. These are people who have been denied health insurance coverage because of a pre-existing health condition, or who can only access private coverage that is restricted or has extremely high rates.

Each of the state risk pool-type programs is different. Generally, the programs operate as a state-created nonprofit Association overseen by a board of directors made up of industry, consumer and state insurance department representatives. The board contracts with an established insurance company to collect premiums and pay claims and administer the program on a day-to-day basis. Insurance benefits vary, but risk pools typically offer benefits that are comparable to basic private market plans -- 80/20 major medical and outpatient coverage, a choice of deductible and co-payments. Maximum lifetime benefits vary by state from as low as $350,000 to $2 million. 
 
Generally, there are no exclusions. However, risk pools do have waiting periods for coverage of pre-existing conditions to make sure individuals pay for continual coverage and the program can operate financially sound. Without waiting periods, the concern is that too many people could forego paying for insurance until they had a high cost claim, and the programs could not function financially. However, under the federal portability legislation, people who have had continuous coverage in the group market, not broken by more than 63 days, can access coverage in risk pools without any waiting periods. 
 
Risk pool insurance generally costs more than regular individual insurance, but the premiums are capped by law in each state to protect the individual from exorbitant costs. The caps range from as low as 125 percent of the average for comparable private coverage in some states, up to 200 percent of the average or more in other states. Most states offer coverage at less than 150 percent of the average. 
 
All state risk pools inherently lose money and need to be subsidized. While the individuals in risk pools pay somewhat higher premiums, roughly 50 percent of overall operating costs need to be subsidized. Subsidy mechanisms also vary from state to state -- some states assess all insurance carriers, HMO's and other insurance providers; others provide an appropriation from state general tax revenue; some states share funding of loss subsidies with the insurance industry using an assessment of insurance carriers and providing them a tax credit for the assessment, or other states have a special funding source, such as a tobacco tax, or a hospital or health care provider surcharge. 
 
It is important to note that risk pools are not created expressly to serve the indigent or poor who cannot afford health insurance. Risk pools are designed to serve people who would not otherwise have the right to purchase health insurance protection. The indigent can access coverage through state medical assistance, Medicaid or similar programs. However, some state risk pools do have a subsidy for lower income, medically uninsurable people. 
 
For information about your state, see "States That Have Risk Pools" contact your state insurance department.
Health insurance and high-risk pools
Federal pool and state-sponsored programs
One of the goals of the Affordable Care Act was to make health insurance available to nearly all Americans, including those with pre-existing conditions. Although group health insurance has long been guaranteed issue for eligible employees, people who purchased their own health insurance prior to 2014 had to go through a medical underwriting process that has historically resulted in roughly 20 percent of individual health insurance applications being denied.

In order to offer a viable alternative for these applicants, 35 states established their own high risk pools (mostly in the 1990s), generally supported by a combination of state funds, enrollee premiums, and fees assessed on private health insurance carriers.

In addition to those plans, the ACA included a provision for the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP), which created a new state or federally run high-risk pool in every state to make a bridge to 2014 and guaranteed issue health insurance. The ACA was signed into law in March of 2010, and at that point, the requirement – starting January 2014 – that all policies be guaranteed issue was still nearly four years in the future.

Now that the consumer protections in the ACA have been fully implemented, risk pools are no longer necessary the way they were in the past. Health insurance applications are no longer denied because of medical history, and people are no longer offered policies with increased premiums or exclusions based on pre-existing conditions.

HHS announced in March that PCIP insureds could keep their coverage until April 30 if they had not yet enrolled in an exchange plan. (Total PCIP enrollment had dropped to around 30,000 people by January 2014, down from about 85,000 three months earlier. The majority of PCIP insureds had already transitioned to a new plan).

All PCIP coverage ended on April 30, 2014. Enrollees in those plans were able to transition to exchange plans during open enrollment, and they also had another 60-day special enrollment period that began on May 1 if they were still insured by a PCIP policy that terminated at the end of April (involuntary loss of coverage is a qualifying event that triggers a special enrollment period). By the end of June, that special enrollment period had closed, although it’s highly likely that almost all of the remaining PCIP members were able to transition to a new ACA-compliant plan by the end of June.

But what about the 35 state-run risk pools that pre-dated the ACA? Many of them have also ceased operations or closed their pools to new applicants, but it varies from one state to another. This chart shows the 17 plans that ended coverage in the first half of 2014, along with the 18 state risk pools that are still operational for at least some existing enrollees – and some of them are still accepting new members as well.

The following states have risk pools that remain operational as of mid-2014. Several of them are still accepting new members, although enrollees would obviously have to meet the existing eligibility guidelines:

Alabama
Alaska
California
Connecticut
Idaho
Illinois
Iowa
Maryland
Minnesota
Mississippi
New Mexico
North Dakota
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Tennessee
Washington
Wyoming
Bridging the gap

The ACA’s temporary Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plans (PCIP) were initially run by state governments in 27 states and by the federal government in 23 states and the District of Columbia. By July 2013, 17 states that had been operating their own PCIP had turned their plans over to the federal government. New-member enrollment ceased in early 2013, and all PCIP coverage ended on April 30, 2014.

The PCIP program was well-intentioned but struggled financially from the outset, with lower enrollment and higher costs than originally projected. In order to help keep the program afloat as long as possible, HHS made some changes along the way.

In 2011, eligibility requirements were eased in order to increase enrollment. Premiums were also lowered by up to 40 percent in 18 states where the PCIP is administered by the federal government, to bring the premiums closer to the rates in each state’s individual health insurance market.

In the face of higher-than-expected costs, however, the government increased enrollees’ maximum out-of-pocket annual expenses for 2013 from $4,000 to $6,250. The rate increase took effect January 1, and applies to plans administered by the federal government, which impacts enrollees in 40 states and the District of Columbia.

Risk pools by the numbers

Roughly 135,000 people enrolled in PCIP plans nationwide between 2010 and 2013. To qualify, people had to have been without health insurance for at least six months and must have a pre-existing health condition or have been denied coverage as a result of a health condition.

The PCIP program’s high cost has been attributed in part to the fact that the population served is disproportionately older. More than seven in 10 people enrolled are age 45 and above.

Nearly four in ten claims paid in 2012 were for one of four diagnoses: cancers, ischemic heart disease, degenerative bone diseases, and the follow-up medical care required after major surgery or cancer treatments. In 2012, the average cost per person was $32,108. However, just 4.4 percent of enrollees averaged costs of $225,000 accounting for more than half of all claims paid.

Now that PCIP enrollees have mostly transitioned to the private marketplace (either on or off-exchange) or to Medicaid, their medical expenses are being pooled with a much larger group of people, including healthy insureds. This helps to spread the costs over a larger population and better manage the health care costs of the sicker individuals who were covered by PCIP policies between 2010 and 2014.
What are high-risk pools?

Even though most Americans get their health insurance through their employer or the employer of a family member (group health insurance), some people do not have access to this type of coverage and buy their own insurance independently. Unlike the group health insurance market, in most states an insurer can turn you down for individual coverage if you have a serious pre-existing medical condition (e.g., cancer, HIV) that would make you uninsurable. States are not required to have an alternative option for medically uninsurable individuals to access coverage, but most do. A high-risk health insurance pool is the most common way to provide individuals access to coverage. In addition, in many states, high-risk pools serve as the guanrateed-issue purchasing option for individuals who wish to exercise federal group-to-individual insurance portability rights. High-risk pools are also available in many states as a purchasing option for individuals who are eligible for the 65 percent federal health insurance tax credit provided by the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act of 2002.

How do high-risk pools work?

High-risk pools are private, self-funded health insurance plans organized by state to serve high-risk individuals who meet enrollment criteria and do not have access to group insurance. In most states, they are independent entities governed by their own boards and administrators, but in some states they function as part of the state's department of insurance. You can apply for high-risk pool coverage through an insurance agent or directly with the state. You generally have a choice of health plan options and will receive enrollment cards and other information just like any other health plan. High-risk pools normally contract with a health insurance carrier or third-party administrator to administer paperwork and claims, so your enrollment card and other paperwork may not even appear to be produced by the high-risk pool. Once enrolled, you use your benefits just like any other consumer of private insurance coverage.

What type of coverage options do high-risk pools provide?

Coverage options are very similar to traditional individual health insurance offerings. It is generally a comprehensive major medical plan with a range of deductible options. The most common risk-pool option is a PPO plan, but many states also offer indemnity coverage and some state have HMO and/or HSA options available to consumers. Most pools offer coverage of prescription drugs, maternity, and mental health and substance abuse, among other services. Many have excellent disease management programs for enrollees since so many pools serve people with severe chronic illnesses.

How much does high-risk pool insurance cost?

RIsk pool health insurance is more expensive than traditional individual insurance. This is fair because pool members, by definition, are those who are considered to be medically uninsurable. State laws generally cap risk pool rates between 125-150 percent of the base individual market rate

Example: If the average standard individual market base rate in a state for a 30-year old male is $100/month, a medically uninsurable male of the same age would pay $125-$150/month for comprehensive coverage in a risk pool.

Risk pool rates are determined by your age and sometimes by where you live in the state. Pool rates are fairly affordable nationwide because they are directly tied to the rates in each state's existing individual market.

Will a high-risk pool cover all of my medical conditions immediately?

Just like almost all individual policies, high-risk pool policies contain pre-existing condition waiting periods to prevent adverse selection. Adverse selection occurs when a person buys health insurance only after he or she has a medical problem that will require the use of benefits. However, nearly all pools give consumers credit against the waiting period if you have had prior health insurance coverage within a specified number of days. The amount of the credit against the waiting period is generally proportional to the length of the prior coverage.

Does my state have a high-risk pool?

Thirty-three states have high-risk pools. NAHU's Health Care Coverage Options Database can tell you if your state has a pool, provide you with contact information for that pool, and also tell you the basic participation requirements.

What if my state does not have a high-risk pool?

Twelve states use other means to provide coverage for medically uninsurable individuals such as requiring that all individual policies be issued at least part of the year without regard to medical condition, coverage through a designated carrier of last resort, or coverage through a reinsurance pool. The remaining five states have no means of providing individual market access to people with catastrophic medical conditions. High-risk consumers in those states may have trouble obtaining coverage. To find out the options for high-risk health insurance consumers in your state, please look at NAHU's Health Care Coverage Options Database. To find an insurance agent or broker your area who can assist you in finding high-risk pool or other individual coverage, please go to NAHU's agent locator. For more general information on individual health insurance, see our Consumer Guide to Individual Health Insurance Coverage.
What Is Risk Pooling in Insurance?
by Leslie McClintock, Demand Media
Share
RSS
Email
 Risk pooling provides a safety net that helps entrepreneurs undertake worthy enterprises.
Risk pooling provides a safety net that helps entrepreneurs undertake worthy enterprises.
More Articles
Risk Aversion & Insurance
Why Is Depression Considered a Risk When Purchasing Life Insurance?
Investment Risk Insurance
How Much More Is Homeowners Insurance When You Have a Pool?
Is There a Special Insurance You Need to Have With an Inground Pool Besides Homeowners Insurance?
What Is the Difference Between Standard & Nonstandard Insurance?
In insurance, the term "risk pooling" refers to the spreading of financial risks evenly among a large number of contributors to the program. Insurance is the transference of risks from individuals or corporations who cannot bear a possible unplanned financial catastrophe to the capital markets, which can bear them easily -- at least in theory. The capital markets, meanwhile, are generally happy to take on risk from individuals and corporations -- in exchange for a premium they believe is sufficient to cover the risk.
History
Risk pooling is essential to the concept of insurance. The earliest known insurance policies were written some 5,000 years ago, to protect shippers against the loss of their cargo and crews at sea. Any one of them would be devastated by the loss of a ship. But by pooling their resources, these ancient businessmen were able to spread the risks more evenly among their numbers, so each paid a relatively small amount. Under the Babylonians, those receiving a loan to fund a shipment would pay an additional amount in exchange for a rider cancelling the loan if a shipment should be lost at sea.
Modern Insurance Policies
The insurance industry grew enormously, as individuals and businesses sought to protect themselves from economic catastrophe by transferring their risks to an insurance pool. We still have commercial shipping insurance -- just as we did in the ancient world -- and we also insure against such diverse risks as fires, floods, theft, auto accidents, kidnap and ransom schemes, defaults on the part of our debtors, lawsuits and judgments, dying too early and even against the risk of living too long.
Risk and Premium
A class of professional experts in finance and probability, called actuaries, work for insurance companies to attempt to predict the probability and severity of risk. They also take lapse rates and interest rates or other expected rates of return on investment assets into account, with the goal of setting acceptable premiums. The premium is the cost of pooling one's own risk with that of others via an insurance company and includes the insured's share of expected claims costs, administrative expenses, sales and marketing expenses, and a profit for the insurer. If a premium payer is affected by a covered risk, the insurance company, and not the insured, takes the hit. If claims are higher than expected, however, the insurance company may have to raise rates on policy holders across the board.
Insurable vs. Uninsurable Risks
Not every negative economic event is insurable. For risk pooling to be effective, the risk should be unforeseen and infrequent. If a negative event can be predicted in a certain case, it's not a risk, but certainty -- and certainties are not insurable (with the possible exception of death, which is insurable because its timing is uncertain). Furthermore, if a risk is too frequent, it cannot meaningfully be transferred to an insurance company, since the insurance company would only pass on the cost of the negative occurrence to the pool of insureds, along with their expenses and profits. If nearly everyone in a risk pool is filing a claim, then they are likely better off not attempting to pool their risks at all but setting aside sufficient reserves to pay for them themselves.
A separate account established to hold income and expenses and is used when insurance groups come together to combine their premiums and paying out losses, typically used during disasters like floods, hurricanes, and other disasters.
COVERAGE OF UNINSURABLE PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS: STATE AND FEDERAL HIGH-RISK POOLS
To aid uninsurable individuals, 35 states implemented high-risk health insurance pools over three decades.  The Federal health reform law of 2010 provides $5 billion among all 50 states, for newly created or add-on expanded programs run by states or by a designated insurer, if states choose those options.  27 states had done so by fall 2010.  23 states deferred to the federal government to handle the new programs. 
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) established a major new 3 1/2 year transitional program known as the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP), which launched in the summer of 2010.  Full PCIP operational details are provided in section 2, below.
A new report as of June 20, 2014 lists the status of each of the 35 state high risk pools, and their plans regarding anticipated continuation of enrollment and coverage. [ 2014 Pool Enrollment Survey ] The April chart grouped the state pools into 2 categories: 17 states that will cancel coverage by early/mid-2014 and up to 18 that will continue to provide coverage in some capacity until a final decision is made.  The status table, based an surveys by NASCHIP, will be periodically updated.
From the federal prsepective, as of late 2013, 17 States (AR, CA, CO, IA, IL, KS, MI, MO, NH, NY, NC, OH, OR, SD, UT, WA) had begun the process of transitioning their state operated Pre-existing Condition Insurance Plans (PCIPs) to federally operated PCIPs, a process that is coordinated by HHS and CCIIO. These in turn were set to terminate in early 2014..Only 10 states (AK, CT, MD, ME, MT, NJ, NM, OK, RI, WI) continue to operate their own, state-based PCIP or high-risk pool.
 
For millions of Americans with a pre-existing medical condition, health insurance can be an unattainable goal. In the absence of laws requiring insurers to provide individual coverage to people with pre-existing conditions, many of these people joined the ranks of the uninsured. These uninsurable individuals have sought coverage, but have been unable to purchase it because they have been rejected or because they have been offered coverage only at unaffordable, high premium rates. Because of their often complex or costly health conditions, uninsurable individuals are the segment of the larger uninsured population that most needs health insurance coverage. 
 
In response to the problems of uninsurable individuals, 35 states set up high-risk health insurance pools over a 25 year span, from 1976 to 2009.  Across these 35 states, the national enrollment was 226,615 by December 31, 2011. This compared to 200,047 as of December 2007.  This is about 1.9 percent of the individual market enrollment, but is up to 25 percent of the individual market documented to be subject to denials or "adverse underwriting" restrictions due to pre-existing medical conditions.
 
UPDATE:  For individuals that are losing coverage on April 30, 2014, through the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Program, (PCIP) they are able to enroll into a health insurance plan under the Special Enrollment Period. Section 1101 of the Affordable Care Act establishes a “temporary high risk health insurance pool program” to provide health coverage to eligible uninsured individuals with pre-existing conditions. The program, carried out by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) directly in some states and through contracts in other states and known as the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Program (PCIP), has provided coverage to these eligible individuals since 2010. Section 1101(g)(3)(B) authorizes the Secretary of HHS to develop procedures to provide for the transition of PCIP enrollees into qualified health plans offered through an Exchange (also called Health Insurance Marketplace). This section also requires the Secretary of HHS to develop procedures to ensure that there is no lapse in coverage for these enrollees, including extending coverage after plan termination if she determines that an extension is necessary to avoid such a lapse. While the majority of enrollees transitioned out of PCIP coverage on January 1, 2014, the Secretary determined that an extension of PCIP coverage was necessary to avoid a lapse in coverage for PCIP enrollees who, on January 1, 2014, were not yet enrolled in other coverage.  Thus, these individuals were offered transitional coverage beginning on January 1, 2014 and extending through April 30, 2014. 
> HHS PCIP Bulletin is available here and the PCIP Fact Sheet is available here - April 2014
Federal PCIP Coverage Extended through March 31, 2014.  The federall-run Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP) will offer the option of two additional months of PCIP coverage to people currently enrolled in PCIP who have not yet found new health insurance coverage. This transitional coverage through March 31, 2014, will allow PCIP enrollees more time to review Marketplace plan options and enroll in the coverage that best meets their needs before open enrollment closes in March. They will be notified on www.pciplan.com and by mail of this option to extend their PCIP plan through March, along with details about cost-sharing. Eligible enrollees can purchase PCIP transitional coverage by sending in February and March premium payments; which will be the same monthly rate that they paid for January 2014. For question about benefits please go here.
On February 16, 2013, the federally-run Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP) suspended acceptance of new enrollment applications until further notice. State-based PCIPs may continue accepting enrollment applications through March 2, 2013 and will then suspend acceptance of new enrollment applications until further notice.  PCIP will continue providing coverage to more than 100,000 people currently enrolled nationwide."
Source:  http://www.healthcare.gov/law/features/choices/pre-existing-condition-insurance-plan/index.html
FEDERAL HEALTH REFORM - THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT INSURANCE REFORMS:

Section 1101: ESTABLISHES AN INTERIM HIGH-RISK POOL PROGRAM
Provided immediate access to insurance for Americans who are uninsured because of a pre-existing condition.
Established a temporary national high-risk pool to provide health coverage to individuals with pre-existing medical conditions.
U.S. citizens and legal immigrants who have a pre-existing medical condition and who have been uninsured for at least six months will be eligible to enroll in the high-risk pool and receive subsidized premiums.
Premiums for the pool will be established based on a standard population and may vary by no more than a 4 to 1 ratio due to age.
The law appropriates $5 billion to finance the program.
The new pools are to be administered directly by a state or a nonprofit entity under contract. States may not reduce their current high risk pool efforts.  
CMS has estimated that about 375,000 people may be eligible to sign up for the federally-funded high risk pools.
Premiums in the new federal pool are designed to be 10 percent to 50 percent lower than current state rates.  Co-payments and deductibles are also expected to be considerably lower. Current beneficiaries in state high-risk pools could get the federal coverage only if they drop out of their state pool and remain uninsured for six months.
The high risk pool provision of the federal law became effective 90 days after enactment, June 21, 2010.  Individual policies are offered for sale  after July 1, 2010; the federal program remains legally in effect until January 1, 2014.1
 
Lower Premiums and Simpler Rules for High Risk Insurance - NCSL article, published 6/3/2011
Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP): State by State PREMIUMS and COSTS, 2011 (NCSL)
Health Law Clock Is Ticking for Sickest Patients (Oct. 31, 2013)
(Associated Press) -- "Hundreds of thousands of people across the country with pre-existing chronic conditions such as cancer, heart failure or kidney disease who are covered through high risk-insurance pools will see their coverage dissolve by year's end. They are supposed to gain regular coverage under the Affordable Care Act, which requires insurers to cover those with severe medical problems. But many of them have had trouble signing up for health insurance through the exchanges and could find themselves without coverage in January if they don't meet a Dec. 15 deadline to enroll. Administration officials say the federal exchange, which covers more than half the states, won't be working probably until the end of November, leaving people just two weeks to sign up if they want coverage by Jan. 1.
'These individuals can't be without coverage for even a month,' said Tanya Case, the chairwoman of the National Association of State Comprehensive Health Insurance Plans, which represents the nation's high-risk pools. 'It's a matter of life or death.' High-risk pools were created by state legislatures to provide a safety net for people who have been denied or priced out of coverage. The Affordable Care Act will forbid insurers from turning away people in poor health. And while coverage can be purchased outside the exchanges, those who qualify for subsidies can only get them through a state or federal marketplace. More than a dozen of the 35 states that run insurance pools for people with serious medical issues will permanently close their pools within a month and half. Other states will keep their pools running for a few more months. The federal pool covers about 100,000 people and was created in 2010 by the Affordable Care Act as a temporary bridge until the law fully kicks in. It will cease to exist at the end of December."
Policymakers are exploring alternative risk
pooling mechanisms as part of their efforts
to expand the availability and affordability of
health insurance coverage. From proposals
that would create health insurance exchanges
to those that would include an individual
mandate, these alternatives have the potential
to significantly affect the composition of
health insurance risk pools and subsequently
affect premiums.
For a risk pool to remain viable, it must
be of sufficient size and comprised of a
broad cross section of risks.
Health insurance risk pools are large groups of
individual entities (either individuals or employers)
whose medical costs are combined in
order to calculate premiums. The pooling of
risk is fundamental to insurance. Large pools
of similar risks exhibit stable and measurable
characteristics that enable actuaries to estimate
future costs with an acceptable degree
of accuracy. This, in turn, enables actuaries to
determine premium levels that will be stable
over time, relative to overall trends.
Pooling risks together allows the costs of
those at higher risk of high medical costs to be
subsidized by those at lower risk. Creating a
large risk pool, however, does not necessarily
translate into lower premiums. Just as a pool
with more low-risk individuals can result in
lower premiums, a large pool with a disproportionate
share of high-risk individuals
will have higher premiums. When healthier
individuals perceive no economic benefit
to purchasing coverage, the insurance pool
becomes increasingly skewed to those with
higher expected claims. This is commonly
known as adverse selection.
Pools created as a by-product of membership
in a group that is formed for other
reasons, rather than a group that is formed
for the specific purpose of obtaining health
insurance, tend to be less subject to adverse
selection. For instance, a large employer often
creates its own pool to provide coverage to
its workers, who automatically join the pool
as an incidental benefit of employment. This
limits an individual’s ability to select against
a plan. In contrast, people purchasing health
insurance coverage in the individual market
do so for the express purpose of obtaining
coverage, not as an incidental by-product of
being part of a group. Therefore, risk pools
made up of those in the individual market
are much more subject to adverse selection.
In between these two extremes are small and
medium-sized employers. They are not large
enough to form their own pools, so insurers
will combine many of these groups together to form a larger pool. Although there is less
potential for adverse selection than in the
individual market, employers can still select
against insurers by moving into and out of the
insurance market and from carrier to carrier.
Issue and rating rules can affect the
extent of adverse selection.
Issue and rating rules, which vary by state,
can have an impact on adverse selection, and
therefore also on premium levels and the
viability of a health insurance risk pool. For
instance, guaranteed issue and community
rating rules can increase the access to insurance
among high-risk individuals and at the
same premium charged to everyone else.
However, these regulations tend to increase
adverse selection, by providing people an
incentive to delay purchasing coverage until
they have health care needs. As a result, average
premiums can be higher under these types
of market rules. In contrast, allowing insurers
to deny coverage and to charge higher
premiums to those with higher than average
expected health spending could reduce
adverse selection by reducing premiums for
lower risks. However, high-risk individuals
could be denied coverage or face unaffordable
premiums.
Risk pooling is essential for a viable insurance
program, but it does not by itself guarantee
a viable insurance program. It is important
to understand the advantages of pooling,
but also the dangers that can occur if pools
are disrupted by market reforms. If all pools
have to abide by the same rules, such as those
that do not encourage adverse selection, then
adverse selection could be minimized. Allowing
different rules within the same market,
however, will threaten a pool that has the
more stringent requirements, and will result
in market disruption. In other words, rules
governing health insurance attempt to balance
the tradeoffs between access to coverage and
premium affordability. Proposals to implement
alternative risk pooling arrangements
need to maximize the enrollment of healthy
risks, while not pricing the unhealthy risks out
of that market.
An individual mandate can reduce
adverse selection by increasing
participation.
Increasing overall participation in health
insurance plans could be an effective way
to minimize adverse selection. Requiring
individuals to have insurance coverage is one
way to increase participation rates, especially
among low-risk individuals, and to create
a pool with a broad cross section of risks,
thereby reducing adverse selection risk. Other
types of incentives to increase participation
include: limiting open enrollment periods
with penalties for delayed enrollment, subsidizing
premiums, and instituting automatic
enrollment. Medicare Parts B and D include
some of these incentives. Nevertheless, an
effective and enforceable individual mandate
would likely achieve even higher participation
rates than these types of voluntary incentives.
High Risk Insurance Pools
Some states can decline health insurance applications if you have a pre-existing medical condition. However, many states offer health plans that are similar to the coverage in comprehensive individual health insurance plans. The states listed below offer a high risk pool. The Department of Health and Human Services also offers a Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP) for individuals in states that do not have a high risk pool program. Additional information on PCIP can be found on https://www.healthcare.gov/how-does-the-health-care-law-protect-me/pre-existing-conditions

You can also contact the Foundation for Health Coverage Education (FHCE), a non-profit private organization. FHCE sponsors the Coverage For All website, where you will find a list of the options available in your state. Use their helpful tools and expert assistance to find and apply for a broad variety of state-sponsored health coverage and public assistance programs.

Beginning in the summer of 2010, health insurance high risk pools will be strengthened and expanded as a result of health reform legislation. Also as a result of health reform, high risk pools may be phased out entirely in 2014 as consumers will be guaranteed coverage no matter what their health conditions are.

For informational purposes only. The opinions expressed in the Websites above are those of the respective owners, and do not necessarily reflect eHealth's. This page last updated 4/26/10.

eHealthInsurance is the nation's leading online source of health insurance. eHealthInsurance offers thousands of health plans underwritten by more than 180 of the nation's health insurance companies, including Aetna and Blue Cross Blue Shield. Compare plans side by side, get health insurance quotes, apply online and find affordable health insurance today.
HOW INSURANCE COMPANIES
EVALUATE RISK AND RATE YOUR EXPOSURE
By David Hampson
Cross Insurance, Exeter
 
Insurance companies have underwriting departments to evaluate a risk and appropriately rate the exposure in much the same way as a mortgage company underwrites a loan application. When you consider the amount of money that can be on the line with an insurance company’s promise to pay, it’s easy to recognize the importance of underwriting before taking on a risk. Most people are surprised todiscover the low margins at which an insurance company operates. A combined loss ratio of 95-98% is generally considered excellent performance when an insurance carrier reviews its overall annual results. This means that, with exemplary performance, the sum of all claims and expenses amount to 95-98% of the premiums paid by all insureds. Irresponsible underwriting can easily tilt the loss ratios in the wrong direction and be the source of financial ruin for an insurance carrier (this is what happened in the mortgage industry!). Although we may not individually submit a claim each year, it’s easy to forget about the amount of money an insurance company has to pay out collectively to settle claims. Nonetheless, the underwriting process can be a source of frustration for insureds whom are eager to secure coverage and feel bombarded by the number of questions asked and inspections required.
 
It can be helpful to know in advance some of the underwriting information insurance carriers are looking for before seeking coverage. Generally when applying for a homeowner’s policy or commercial property coverage the insurance company will want to know various characteristics of the building such as year built, type of construction, square footage, updates and protective equipment. Depending on the carrier, there may be additional information required, such as interior and/or exterior pictures, and details with regards to the occupancy and type of tenants, if any. When applying for liability coverages, insurance companies will require the exposure base such as sales, payroll, or area. For auto policies underwriters will need a list of the vehicles, radius of operations, use, and list of drivers. Workers compensation applications will require information on payroll broken down by class of work, and information on any safety programs implemented.
 
Your prior loss history is another important criteria underwriters review for all lines of coverage. If a risk has a high loss frequency or severity it may be to be quoted at a higher rate in order for the insurance carrier to collect enough premium dollars to cover future predicted losses. Actuarially, it has been demonstrated that a risk with poor loss history is more likely to sustain future losses. Although individually your claims may have just been a streak of bad luck, insurance companies practicing sound underwriting generally need to base their rating on statistics accumulated from many insureds (law of large numbers).
 
Another underwriting variable most insurance companies now use for rating personal lines policies is your credit score. This has been a controversial practice, which has been questioned by consumer advocates since it was implemented several years ago. However, there does seem to be a clear correlation between credit score and claims submitted when large data sets are analyzed. Why this certainly does not imply that a poor credit score causes one to have more losses, there does seem to be a propensity for people on the low end of the credit scale to put in more frequent claims. Industry experts have not been able to explain the correlation beyond this, but one can surmise that individuals with less debt and more funds available may decide to pay for small losses on their own and not submit a claim.
Many insurance underwriters will also order a loss control inspection after a policy has been issued. This is to identify hazards that are likely to cause a loss and make recommendations to correct them. These inspections are actually a value-added service as they help you prevent a property loss or liability lawsuit that can be frustrating, time-consuming, and ultimately an expense to you via deductible payments and higher insurance rates. Many carriers also perform a replacement cost estimator to evaluate whether your property is adequately insured to value. If approached with the right attitude, the inspections can be a constructive benefit to your insurance policy and part of your overall risk management program.
 
In summary, obtaining underwriting information is critical for insurance companies to maintain responsible business practices that generate enough revenue to cover all possible claims and operating expenses. Although some underwriting variables may not be relevant to you specifically, they have proved to be reliably predictive with large data sets. The underwriting process can make you feel like you’re going through the “third-degree” at times, but hopefully this article has helped explain the background and rationale behind gathering this information. Ultimately, by keeping insurance companies financially strong, sound underwriting practices are in the best interest of policyholders and the health of our country’s entire insurance infrastructure.
Too important to fail: Insurance company enterprise risk and capital management capabilities

Regulatory and market forces are generating incentives for property and casualty (P&C) and life insurance companies to reexamine and enhance strategies, processes, and infrastructures for measuring performance and analyzing risk.

Leading insurers evaluate risk management by aligning the risk management model to the business model and focusing on aggregate exposures (gross and net) and product. This allows risk managers to understand their organization's accumulations across the business model and to mitigate those exposures as economically or efficiently as possible.

Insurers that regularly evaluate, emphasize, and update their risk management capabilities will be better positioned to meet the expectations of policyholders, shareholders, and regulators, and to leverage their strengths competitively.

This Viewpoint explains how insurers can evaluate and adapt their risk management capabilities as part of an overall competitive strategy that includes:

Periodic reevaluation of risk management capabilities in light of leading market practices and changes in business architectures
Technical assistance with the execution and management of improvement initiatives
A review of risk management capabilities for executive management or the board
Insurance Companies' Risk Evaluation Procedures
Insurance companies risk evaluation procedures takes into account the cost of risk and the ability of the company to underwrite it. Risk evaluation is an essential function of an insurance company involving the company’s actuaries and risk managers who assess the quality of risk, the likelihood of its occurrence and the cost to policy owners.

Looking at Risk from Insurance Company Perspective

When an insurance company looks to underwrite risk of particular type such as life or property. To be competitive with other insurance companies, the insurer is looking at ways to keep premiums low without adversely adding to the potential overall risk to existing policy owners. This comes about through the risk evaluation process that is undertaken by the insurance company.

May Hire a Consultant

The insurance company may hire an outside consultant to assist with the process of creating a workflow process for the evaluation of risk. This process helps the insurance company determine the potential impact of the risk and what its potential cost may be to the insurer. The insurer will look at comparable statistics for similar types of risk as a basis for its evaluation process.

Documentation for Risk Evaluation

The insurance company will create a set of documentation of its practices associated with risk evaluation. Actual processes are created and members of the risk evaluation team seek out data necessary to support the insurance company’s pricing strategy. The underwriters for the insurer are another source of information for the risk evaluation process. Underwriters have access to the information regarding the types of factors presented when underwriting risk and the commonality of certain risk factors.

Data Gathering and Analysis

How data is used by the insurance company determined how risk is evaluated. The type of data used also influences the risk evaluation process. An insurance company’s procedures, which will vary from company to company, include the divergent elements of the insurer with access to information with risk information.

Streamlined and Automated Procedures

The processes and procedures of the insurance company are streamlined and automated in order to provide the actuaries with the ability to develop pricing models. Once the insurance company develops an understanding of the nature of risk and the potential impact that it may have on the insurer. This analysis creates the appropriate pricing in comparison to what other insurers assess for the same level of risk. This is an important aspect of the process because pricing risk to high will make the insurance product unsellable and pricing it too low will create a loss for the insurer.

EVENT INSURANCE
Event Insurance Now offers Special Event Insurance in all states through an easy-to-use online event insurance application. This online event insurance program was designed to allow you to quote and purchase event insurance EASILY and INSTANTLY, and is appropriate for events lasting from one day to ten days in length. Our experienced staff will be happy to assist you with any questions or requests regarding special event insurance. Event Insurance Now provides the coverage you need for all your special events. 

SPECIAL EVENT INSURANCE
If you are having a public event whether a wedding and reception or a festival you need the protection of Special Event Insurance. Our Event Liability Insurance is designed to protect the policyholder against lawsuits, claims made related to bodily injury of others, and property damage to the rented premise. We provide Special Event Liability Insurance through our Commercial General Liability (CGL) policy, often called Spectator or Public Liability Insurance, which satisfies the requirements of most rental locations. 

EVENT INSURANCE EXPERTISE
Our staff understands the unique needs of first time buyers as well as those of a seasoned event producer. With over 35 years of industry experience, our staff will be happy to assist you with any questions or requests regarding special event insurance.
SPECIAL EVENT INSURANCE

When Every Little Detail Matters

Whether it’s a birthday party, anniversary or baby shower, organizing a thoughtful event requires meticulous planning, not to mention a lot of energy. So it’s no surprise that most people focus on the necessities and fail to consider the unexpected. Fact is, unforeseen occurrences like extreme weather, accidents or illness could very well leave you in an uncomfortable position. So whether you’re planning an event for yourself or close family member, Markel Event Insurance can minimize your responsibility and loss if you face an unavoidable setback.

Markel wants to help you protect your investment—and your pocketbook—with Event Insurance. When you consider how much effort you devote to planning, preparing and perfecting, insurance for events is not only smart, but also is surprisingly affordable. With a policy from Markel, you’re covered for non-refundable deposits, cancellation fees, and even injury or liability from accidents during your event.

Some events we’ve covered:

Anniversary Party
Baby Shower
Baptism
Bar or Bat Mitzvah
Birthday Party
Housewarming Party
Memorial Service
Quinceañera
Retirement Party
Special Achievement Reception
Much, much more
Choose the Event Insurance Policy That’s Right for You

Markel offers two types of event insurance policies to help safeguard your financial investment. Purchase them individually or as a package for total event insurance coverage.

Save 15% on your premium when you purchase a package with both event cancellation and event liability policies. Get total protection and a discount today! (FL discount is 10%.)

Event Cancellation & Postponement Insurance

Event Cancellation Insurance covers you if you need to cancel or postpone your event due to things like an accident or vendor bankruptcy. We reimburse money you’ve spent and cover you for penalty charges. Or we’ll help cover extra expenses so you can make last-minute changes and hold your event.

Learn about Event Cancellation & Postponement Insurance
Event Liability Insurance

Liability coverage protects you from financial loss in the event of injury, incidents or property damage to the venue during your rental period. Many venues now require liability event coverage and Markel makes it easy and simple for you to comply.

Learn about Event Liability Insurance
Business and Corporate Event Insurance

Markel also offers liability coverage for your business and corporate events. (Events must have less than 500 attendees. Not available in AK or FL.)

Business Dinner
Business Meeting
Corporate Private Party
Fundraiser Dinner
Non-Profit Function
Additional insured? Never an additional charge.

Many venues now require event liability insurance. Generally, the venue will be named as “Additional Insured” on the Certificate of Insurance. Markel includes this with your policy at no extra cost.

Net Insurance Benefits, or NIBs, is a term currently used in the life settlement industry to describe the net cash flows from a portfolio of life contingent assets commonly structured to pool assets together for purposes of diversification, favorable tax treatment, or other desirable portfolio characteristics. Often, but not always, the underlying assets are combined with other insurance products to produce a more attractive risk profile than the underlying assets by themselves. In its simplest form, a NIB represents the profits from a portfolio of life insurance policies. The market value of a NIB can vary depending on the presence or absence of certain underlying enhancements such as financing, reinsurance wraps, mortality protection products, or bank guarantees.

Exemptions from the fee for not having health coverage
Most people must have qualifying health coverage or pay a fee (also known as the “penalty,” “fine,” “individual shared responsibility payment,” or “individual mandate”). But if you qualify for a health coverage exemption you don’t have to pay the fee.

There are a variety of exemptions, many of which you can claim on your federal tax return. There are also “hardship” exemptions that you must apply for with a paper application.

See the kinds of health coverage that qualify as “minimum essential coverage” under the health law. If you’re covered by any of these plans, you don’t have to pay the fee or have a health coverage exemption.
Find exemptions that may work for you

Select the button below. We’ll ask you a few questions and show you all health coverage exemptions that may apply to you.

FIND EXEMPTIONS 



Health coverage exemptions

Following is a list of exemptions, including hardship exemptions. For details on each exemption, and to learn how to apply, follow the links below.

Income-related exemptions

The lowest-priced coverage available to you, through either a Marketplace or job-based plan, would cost more than 8% of your household income
You don’t have to file a tax return because your income is below the level that requires you to file
Health coverage-related exemptions

You were uninsured for no more than 2 consecutive months of the year
You were uninsured any number of months before May 2014, but enrolled in a plan starting no later than May 1, 2014
You lived in a state that didn’t expand its Medicaid program but you would have qualified if it had
You enrolled a child in the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) during the 2014 Open Enrollment period and didn’t have coverage for the child earlier in the year
You were enrolled in a type of health coverage through Medicare or TRICARE that covers only certain limited services
You declined an offer of a job-based health plan that started in 2013 and ended in 2014
You had health insurance through AmeriCorps, VISTA, or the National Civilian Community Corps (NCCC)
Group membership exemptions

You’re a member of a federally recognized tribe or eligible for services through an Indian Health Services provider
You’re a member of a recognized health care sharing ministry
You’re a member of a recognized religious sect with religious objections to insurance, including Social Security and Medicare
Other exemptions

You’re incarcerated (serving a term in prison or jail)
You’re a U.S. citizen living abroad, a certain type of non-citizen, or not lawfully present
You experienced one of the hardships below

Hardship exemptions

In addition to the exemptions above, you may qualify for a “hardship” exemption. Hardships are life situations that keep you from getting health insurance.

To claim a hardship exemption, you must fill out a paper application and mail it in to the Marketplace. For details, follow the links below.

Hardships that qualify you for exemptions include:

You were homeless
You were evicted in the past 6 months or were facing eviction or foreclosure
You received a shut-off notice from a utility company
You recently experienced domestic violence
You recently experienced the death of a close family member
You experienced a fire, flood, or other natural or human-caused disaster that caused substantial damage to your property
You filed for bankruptcy in the last 6 months
You had medical expenses you couldn’t pay in the last 24 months that resulted in substantial debt
You experienced unexpected increases in necessary expenses due to caring for an ill, disabled, or aging family member
You expect to claim a child as a tax dependent who’s been denied coverage in Medicaid and CHIP, and another person is required by court order to give medical support to the child. In this case, you don't have the pay the penalty for the child.
As a result of an eligibility appeals decision, you’re eligible for enrollment in a qualified health plan (QHP) through the Marketplace, lower costs on your monthly premiums, or cost-sharing reductions for a time period when you weren’t enrolled in a QHP through the Marketplace
You were determined ineligible for Medicaid because your state didn’t expand eligibility for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act
Your individual insurance plan was cancelled and you believe other Marketplace plans are unaffordable
You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance
More details about hardship exemptions

How long hardship exemptions last
What to do if you experience a hardship that’s not on the list
Hardship exemptions and catastrophic coverage
If you already have an Exemption Certificate Number (ECN)
The fee if you’re unemployed

Guidelines to an exemption from compulsory health insurance
If you already have a health insurance in your home country that meets the Swiss requirements, you can ask
for an exemption from the Swiss health insurance obligation. If you live in the city of Zurich, please follow the
below steps:
After your registration at the “Kreisbüro” you’ll receive a letter from the municipal health
authority of the City of Zurich (“Städtische Gesundheitsdienste”). In the letter, you will be asked
to prove your health insurance coverage. Please await this letter.
Depending on the type of insurance you have, you must hand in the following documents
(address: Städtische Gesundheitsdienste, Walchestrasse 31, Postfach, 8021 Zürich):
You are legally insured by an EU state and
have a European Health Insurance Card:
• The “application form”*
• A copy of your student card
• A copy of your European Health
Insurance Card
You are covered by a private insurance from
an EU or Non-EU country:
• The “application form”*
• A copy of your student card
• The “form A”*, signed and stamped by
your insurance company
• A copy of your health insurance card, if
available
• A copy of your insurance policy
The municipal health authority will forward your documents to the health authority of the
Canton of Zurich (“Gesundheitsdirektion des Kantons Zürich”) for decision. Some weeks later,
you will be informed about their decision on your application by letter. Please note that it is not
possible to predict how the authorities will decide.
IMPORTANT:
• If you live outside the city of Zurich, the procedure will be a bit different but similar to the one described
above. You should ask about it when you register at the municipality.
• If you have any questions about exemption from the Swiss health insurance obligation, please await
the information event that will be held in the first week of the semester. Date and place of this event
will be communicated in good time. 
Is health insurance in Switzerland mandatory?
Yes, it is. Everybody who stays in Switzerland for more than 3 months must have health insurance coverage. You are
responsible for ensuring that you have sufficient health insurance coverage.
What happens if I do not get health insurance within 3 months?
You will be assigned to a health insurance plan by the authorities. This can easily amount to several hundred Swiss Francs
of cost per month that you would have to bear – so, make sure you don’t miss the 3-month deadline!
Can I apply for a Swiss health insurance before I leave my home country?
No, you should wait until you have arrived in Switzerland and applied for your residence permit. You will then be informed
by the local authorities about the health insurance obligation. If you live in the city of Zurich, this letter comes from the
municipal health department (“Städtische Gesundheitsdienste”). If you don’t live in the city of Zurich, this letter should come
from your local municipal authority.
Will my private health insurance be recognized by the authorities in Switzerland?
If your health insurance meets the Swiss legal requirements and has the same coverage as a Swiss basic insurance (KVG)
and your insurance company is willing to sign and stamp the “form A”, you can be exempted from the health insurance
obligation in Switzerland. The procedure is described on the reverse side of this sheet.
What if something happens to me before I have a contract?
You are covered by the insurance company you choose afterwards, provided that you get your health insurance within the
first 3 months after your arrival. All companies are obliged to accept you under the basic insurance plan without requiring a
health check.
Can I save insurance premiums if I wait 3 months before I get health insurance?
No, the insurance contract will be backdated and starts on the day you entered the country.
How can I find an insurance company?
You can use www.comparis.ch and/or www.priminfo.ch to compare premiums. Please note that special packages for
international students (see below) do NOT appear on these websites.
Are there cheap student packages that offer sufficient health insurance coverage?
Yes, there are several companies that offer packages for international students at very reasonable rates (around CHF 85
per month for basic coverage). Please contact the Student Exchange Office (if you are an exchange student) or the
International Student Support Office (if you are a regular BSc or MSc student) to get the application forms.
I am a EU citizen and insured by the state. Do I still need health insurance in Switzerland?
No. If you own a European Health Insurance Card, you can apply for an exemption from the Swiss health insurance
obligation. Please do not forget this application for the exemption! The procedure is described on the reverse side of this
sheet.
I have questions regarding the health insurance system in Switzerland. Where can I get advice?
The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health provides a very informative brochure called “Your questions, our answers”.
The 5 Most Common Health Insurance Exemptions – and Who Qualifies

 – won’t be eligible for Medicaid coverage if they live in a state that didn’t expand the program under the Affordable Care Act. In many cases, these folks also didn’t get subsidies to help buy private insurance through the Marketplace because their income was too low to qualify for premium tax credits. The law doesn’t provide financial assistance to people with incomes below poverty.

Initially, people in this situation were required to apply for Medicaid and be denied, or to get a hardship exemption certificate by applying through the Marketplace.

“The idea was you had to apply to the Marketplace by the end of this year to qualify,” says Timothy Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University. But the IRS recently changed course, thanks in part to a blog post Jost co-wrote in the journal Health Affairs urging it to do so.

Now, this hardship exemption can be claimed on your 2014 tax return.

2. Your income is too low to file for taxes.

Millions of Americans don’t file a tax return because their income falls below the threshold that requires them to do so. That’s the case for a single person who earned less than $10,150 in 2014, or a married couple with an income below $20,300.

“If you don’t have to file taxes then you are also exempt from the mandate,” says Linda Blumberg, health economist with the Urban Institute.

Since you aren’t required to file a tax return, no action is required to take advantage of this exemption from the health law. “You don’t have to apply for the exemption,” Blumberg says, because it will be automatically applied.

3.  Health insurance is too expensive for you.

Despite subsidies to lower costs, health insurance remains unaffordable for millions of Americans. If coverage is too pricey for you, you’ll qualify for an exemption.

“The rule is you get the affordability exemption if the cheapest cost plan is more than 8 percent [of your income],” Pollitz says.

There are a number of reasons why people might find themselves in this circumstance, she says.

For example, individuals with incomes in 2014 of roughly $29,000 and families of four who earned about $59,000 would qualify for a subsidy to help pay for insurance, but would still be required to pay more than 8 percent of their income – the law’s threshold for insurance being deemed too costly.

Some people can stay under that 8 percent threshold by purchasing a less expensive plan, Pollitz points out, “although when they do so they’re going to pick up a lot more cost-sharing,” she says.

But if you’re older, the law allows insurers to charge you more than a younger person for the same health plan. For many people in their 50s and early 60s, it’s possible even the least expensive bronze-level plan will be too pricey.  

That’s also likely to be the case for smokers and people living in an area with high medical costs – two additional factors for which insurers can charge consumers more. If these extra costs tacked onto your health plan premium drive the price of insurance above 8 percent of your household income, you’ll be allowed to file for an exemption.

You can either claim it when you file your federal taxes, or apply for an exemption certificate through the Marketplace.
war exclusion
A provision found in nearly all insurance policies that excludes loss arising out of war or warlike actions. The loss can result from either declared or undeclared war but must be related to actions of a military force directed by a sovereign power. Prior to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the war exclusions in most liability insurance policies applied only with respect to contractually assumed liability, on the theory that private persons and organizations could not otherwise incur liability in connection with war. Following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, "war and terrorism" exclusions that broadened the war portion of the exclusion beyond contractually assumed liability were quickly added to liability policies. That broadened war exclusion is now standard, regardless of whether terrorism is insured or excluded in the policy.
Risk Evaluation in the Insurance Company Using REFII Model





















he insurance industry safeguards the assets of its policyholders by transferring
risk from an individual or business to an insurance company. Insurance companies act as financial intermediaries in that they invest the premiums they collect
for providing this service. Insurance company size is usually measured by net
premiums written, that is, premium revenues less amounts paid for reinsurance.
There are three main insurance sectors: property/casualty, life/health and health
insurance. Property/casualty (P/C) consists mainly of auto, home and commercial insurance. Life/health (L/H) consists mainly of life insurance and annuity
products. Health insurance is offered by private health insurance companies
and some L/H and P/C insurers, as well as by government programs such as
Medicare.
Regulation

All types of insurance are regulated by the states, with each state having its
own set of statutes and rules. State insurance departments oversee insurer solvency, market conduct and, to a greater or lesser degree, review and rule on
requests for rate increases for coverage. The National Association of Insurance
Commissioners develops model rules and regulations for the industry, many
of which must be approved by state legislatures. The McCarran-Ferguson Act,
passed by Congress in 1945, refers to continued state regulation of the insurance
industry as being in the public interest. Under the 1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Financial Services Modernization Act, insurance activities—whether conducted
by banks, broker-dealers or insurers—are regulated by the states. However, there
have been, and continue to be, challenges to state regulation from some segments of the federal government as well as from some financial services firms.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	1

 
Insurance Basics
Overview

Accounting

Insurers are required to use statutory accounting principles (SAP) when filing
annual financial reports with state regulators and the Internal Revenue Service. SAP,
which evolved to enhance the industry’s financial stability, is more conservative
than the generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), established by the independent Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) requires publicly owned companies to report their financial
results using GAAP rules. Insurers outside the United States use standards that differ from SAP and GAAP. As global markets developed, the need for more uniform
accounting standards became clear. In 2001 the International Accounting Standards
Board (IASB), an independent international accounting standards setting organization, began work on a set of standards, called International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) that it hopes will be used around the world. Since 2001 over 100
countries have required or permitted the use of IFRS.
In 2007 the SEC voted to stop requiring non-U.S. companies that use IFRS
to re-issue their financial reports for U.S. investors using GAAP. In 2008 the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners began to explore ways to
move from statutory accounting principles to IFRS. Also in 2008, the FASB and
IASB undertook a joint project to develop a common and improved framework
for financial reporting.
Distribution

Property/casualty and life insurance policies were once sold almost exclusively
by agents—either by captive agents, representing one insurance company, or
by independent agents, representing several companies. Insurance companies
selling through captive agents and/or by mail, telephone or via the Internet
are called “direct writers.” However, the distinctions between direct writers and
independent agency companies have been blurring since the 1990s, when insurers began to use multiple channels to reach potential customers. In addition, in
the 1980s banks began to explore the possibility of selling insurance through
independent agents, usually buying agencies for that purpose. Other distribution channels include sales through professional organizations and through
workplaces.

2

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Auto Insurance

Auto Insurance Basics
Auto insurance protects against financial loss in the event of an accident. It is a
contract between the policyholder and the insurance company. The policyholder agrees to pay the premium and the insurance company agrees to pay losses as
defined in the policy.
Auto insurance provides property, liability and medical coverage:
?	 Property coverage pays for damage to, or theft of, the car.
?	 Liability coverage pays for the policyholder’s legal responsibility to
others for bodily injury or property damage.
?	 Medical coverage pays for the cost of treating injuries, rehabilitation
and sometimes lost wages and funeral expenses.
Most states require drivers to have auto liability insurance before they can legally drive a car. (Liability insurance pays the other driver’s medical, car repair and
other costs when the policyholder is at fault in an auto accident.) All states have
laws that set the minimum amounts of insurance or other financial security
drivers have to pay for the harm caused by their negligence behind the wheel if
an accident occurs. Most auto policies are for six months to a year. A basic auto
insurance policy is comprised of six different kinds of coverage, each of which is
priced separately (see below).
1. Bodily Injury Liability
This coverage applies to injuries that the policyholder and family members listed on the policy cause to someone else. These individuals are also covered when
driving other peoples’ cars with permission. As motorists in serious accidents
may be sued for large amounts, drivers can opt to buy more than the staterequired minimum to protect personal assets such as homes and savings.
2. Medical Payments or Personal Injury Protection (PIP)
This coverage pays for the treatment of injuries to the driver and passengers
of the policyholder’s car. At its broadest, PIP can cover medical payments,
lost wages and the cost of replacing services normally performed by someone
injured in an auto accident. It may also cover funeral costs.
3. Property Damage Liability
This coverage pays for damage policyholders (or someone driving the car with
their permission) may cause to someone else’s property. Usually, this means
damage to someone else’s car, but it also includes damage to lamp posts, telephone poles, fences, buildings or other structures hit in an accident.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	3

 
Insurance Basics
Auto Insurance

4. Collision
This coverage pays for damage to the policyholder’s car resulting from a collision with another car, an object or as a result of flipping over. It also covers
damage caused by potholes. Collision coverage is generally sold with a deductible of $250 to $1,000—the higher the deductible, the lower the premium. Even
if policyholders are at fault for an accident, collision coverage will reimburse
them for the costs of repairing the car, minus the deductible. If the policyholder
is not at fault, the insurance company may try to recover the amount it paid
from the other driver’s insurance company, a process known as subrogation. If
the company is successful, policyholders will also be reimbursed for the deductible.
5. Comprehensive
This coverage reimburses for loss due to theft or damage caused by something
other than a collision with another car or object, such as fire, falling objects,
missiles, explosions, earthquakes, windstorms, hail, flood, vandalism and riots,
or contact with animals such as birds or deer. Comprehensive insurance is usually sold with a $100 to $300 deductible, though policyholders may opt for a
higher deductible as a way of lowering their premium. Comprehensive insurance may also reimburse the policyholder if a windshield is cracked or shattered.
Some companies offer separate glass coverage with or without a deductible.
States do not require the purchase of collision or comprehensive coverage, but
lenders may insist borrowers carry it until a car loan is paid off. It may also be a
requirement of some dealerships if a car is leased.
6. Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Coverage
Uninsured motorist coverage will reimburse the policyholder, a member of the
family or a designated driver if one of them is hit by an uninsured or a hit-andrun driver. Underinsured motorist coverage comes into play when an at-fault
driver has insufficient insurance to pay for the other driver’s total loss. This coverage will also protect a policyholder who is hit while a pedestrian.

4

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Homeowners Insurance

Homeowners Insurance Basics
Homeowners insurance provides financial protection against disasters. It is a package policy, which means that it covers both damage to property and liability, or
legal responsibility, for any injuries and property damage policyholders or their
families cause to other people. This includes damage caused by household pets.
Damage caused by most disasters is covered but there are exceptions. Standard
homeowners policies do not cover flooding, earthquakes or poor maintenance.
Flood coverage, however, is available in the form of a separate policy both from
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and from a few private insurers. Earthquake coverage is available either in the form of an endorsement or
as a separate policy. Most maintenance-related problems are the homeowners’
responsibility.
A standard homeowners insurance policy includes four essential types of
coverage. They include:
1. Coverage for the Structure of the Home
This part of a policy pays to repair or rebuild a home if it is damaged or
destroyed by fire, hurricane, hail, lightning or other disaster listed in the policy.
It will not pay for damage caused by a flood, earthquake or routine wear and
tear. Most standard policies also cover structures that are not attached to a
house such as a garage, tool shed or gazebo. Generally, these structures are covered for about 10 percent of the total amount of insurance on the structure of
the home.
2. Coverage for Personal Belongings
Furniture, clothes, sports equipment and other personal items are covered if
they are stolen or destroyed by fire, hurricane or other insured disaster. Most
companies provide coverage for 50 to 70 percent of the amount of insurance on
the structure of a home. This part of the policy includes off-premises coverage.
This means that belongings are covered anywhere in the world, unless the policyholder has decided against off-premises coverage. Expensive items like jewelry,
furs and silverware are covered, but there are usually dollar limits if they are stolen. To insure these items to their full value, individuals can purchase a special
personal property endorsement or floater and insure the item for its appraised
value.
Trees, plants and shrubs are also covered under standard homeowners insurance—generally up to about $500 per item. Perils covered are theft, fire, lightning, explosion, vandalism, riot and even falling aircraft. They are not covered
for damage by wind or disease.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	5

 
Insurance Basics
Homeowners Insurance

3. Liability Protection
Liability coverage protects against the cost of lawsuits for bodily injury or property damage that policyholders or family members cause to other people. It also
pays for damage caused by pets. The liability portion of the policy pays for both
the cost of defending the policyholder in court and any court awards—up to the
limit of the policy. Coverage is not just in the home but extends to anywhere
in the world. Liability limits generally start at about $100,000. However, experts
recommend that homeowners purchase at least $300,000 worth of protection.
An umbrella or excess liability policy, which provides broader coverage, including claims for libel and slander, as well as higher liability limits, can be added to
the policy. Generally, umbrella policies cost between $200 to $350 for $1 million of additional liability protection.
Homeowners policies also provide no-fault medical coverage. In the event
that someone is injured in a policyholder’s home, the injured person can simply submit medical bills to the policyholder’s insurance company. In this way
expenses are paid without a liability claim being filed. This coverage, however,
does not pay the medical bills for the policyholder’s own family or pets.
4. Additional Living Expenses
This pays the additional costs of living away from home if a house is inhabitable due to damage from a fire, storm or other insured disaster. It covers hotel
bills, restaurant meals and other extra living expenses incurred while the home
is being rebuilt. Coverage for additional living expenses differs from company to
company. Many policies provide coverage for about 20 percent of the insurance
on a house. The coverage can be increased for an additional premium. Some
companies sell a policy that provides an unlimited amount of loss-of-use coverage, but for a limited amount of time.
Additional living expense coverage also reimburses homeowners who rent
out part of their home for the rent that would have been collected from a tenant if the home had not been destroyed.
Types of Homeowners Insurance Policies

There are several types of homeowners insurance policies that differ in the amount
of insurance coverage they provide. The different types are fairly standard throughout the country. However, individual states and companies may offer policies that
are slightly different or go by other names such as “standard” or “deluxe.” People
who rent the homes they live in have specific renters policies.

6

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Homeowners Insurance

The various types of homeowners insurance policies are listed below.
   HO-3: This is the most common policy and protects the home from all
perils except those specifically excluded.
   HO-1: Limited coverage policy
This “bare bones” policy provides coverage against the first 10 disasters. It is
no longer available in most states.
   HO-2: Basic policy
A basic policy provides protection against all 16 disasters. There is a version
of HO-2 designed for mobile homes.
   HO-8: Older home
Designed for older homes, this policy usually reimburses for damage on an
actual cash value basis, which means replacement cost less depreciation. Full
replacement cost policies may not be available for some older homes.
   HO4: Renter
Created specifically for people who rent the home they live in, this policy
protects personal possessions and any parts of the apartment that the
policyholder owns, such as newly installed kitchen cabinets, against all 16
disasters.
   H0-6: Condo/Co-op
A policy for people who own a condo or co-op, it provides coverage for
belongings and the structural parts of the building that they own. It protects
against all 16 disasters.
What Type of Disasters Are Covered?

Most homeowners policies cover the 16 disasters listed below. Some “bare bones”
policies only cover the first 10:
   Fire or lightning
   Windstorm or hail
   Explosion
   Riot or civil commotion
   Damage caused by aircraft
   Damage caused by vehicles

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	7

 
Insurance Basics
Homeowners Insurance

   Smoke
   Vandalism or malicious mischief
   Theft
   Volcanic eruption
   Falling object
   Weight of ice, snow or sleet
   Accidental discharge or overflow of water or steam from within a plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, or automatic fire-protective sprinkler system, or
from a household appliance
   Sudden and accidental tearing apart, cracking, burning, or bulging of a
steam or hot water heating system, an air conditioning or automatic fireprotective system
   Freezing of a plumbing, heating, air conditioning or automatic, fireprotective sprinkler system, or of a household appliance
   Sudden and accidental damage from artificially generated electrical current
(does not include loss to a tube, transistor or similar electronic component)
Standard Homeowners Policy Exclusions

Standard homeowners policies exclude coverage for flood, earthquake, war,
nuclear accident, landslide, mudslide, sinkhole. Some of these exclusions are
discussed below.
1. Floods
Flood damage is excluded under standard homeowners and renters insurance policies. Flood coverage, however, is available in the form of a separate policy both
from the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and from a few private insurers.
Additional information on flood insurance can be found on the FloodSmart.gov
Web site or by calling 888-379-9531. For coverage over and above the $250,000
limit for property and $100,000 for contents provided by the NFIP, excess flood
insurance is available from private insurance companies. (See Topic on Flood
Insurance on page 47 for further information.)
Tsunamis cause flood damage and are therefore only covered by a flood policy.
2. Earthquakes
Earthquake coverage can be a separate policy or an endorsement to a homeowners or renters policy. It is available from most insurance companies. In
8

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Homeowners Insurance

California, it is also available from the California Earthquake Authority, a privately funded, publically managed organization. In earthquake prone states like
California, the policy comes with a high deductible.
3. Damage Resulting from “Faulty, Defective or Inadequate” Maintenance,
Workmanship, Construction or Materials
Defective products can include construction materials. An insurance policy will
not cover damage due to lack of maintenance, mold, termite infestation and
infestation from other pests. It is the policyholder’s responsibility to take reasonable precautions to protect the home from damage.
Levels of Coverage

There are three coverage options.
1. Actual Cash Value
This type of coverage pays to replace the home or possessions minus a deduction for depreciation.
2. Replacement Cost
This type of coverage pays the cost of rebuilding or repairing the home or
replacing possessions without a deduction for depreciation.
3. Guaranteed/Extended Replacement Cost
An extended replacement cost policy pays a certain percentage, generally 20-25
percent, over the coverage limit to rebuild the home in the event that materials
and labor costs are pushed up by a widespread disaster, for example. For example, if homeowners take out a policy for $100,000, they can get up to an extra
$20,000 or $25,000 of coverage.
Some companies offer a guaranteed replacement cost policy, which pays
whatever it costs to rebuild the home as it was before the fire or other disaster,
even if it exceeds the policy limit. This gives protection against sudden increases
in construction costs due to a shortage of building materials after a widespread
disaster or other unexpected situations. It generally does not cover the cost
of upgrading the house to comply with current building codes. However, an
endorsement (or an addition to) the policy called Ordinance or Law can help
pay for these additional costs.
Guaranteed and extended replacement cost policies are more expensive; but
can offer excellent financial protection against disasters. This type of coverage,
however, may not be available in all states or from all companies.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	9

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

Business Insurance Basics
Most businesses need to purchase at least the following four types of insurance:
1. Property Insurance
Property insurance compensates a business if the property used in the business
is lost or damaged as the result of various types of common perils, such as fire
or theft. Property insurance covers not just a building or structure but also the
contents, including office furnishings, inventory, raw materials, machinery,
computers and other items vital to a business’s operations. Depending on the
type of policy, property insurance may include coverage for equipment breakdown, removal of debris after a fire or other destructive event, some types of
water damage and other losses.
Business Interruption Insurance

Also known as business income insurance, business interruption insurance is
a type of property insurance. A business whose property has sustained a direct
physical loss such as fire damage or a damaged roof due to a tree falling on it
in a windstorm and has to close down completely while the premises are being
repaired may lose out to competitors. A quick resumption of business after a
disaster is essential. That is why business interruption insurance is so important.
There are typically three types of business interruption insurance. A business
can purchase any one or combination of these.
  	 Business	Income	Coverage:	Compensates for lost income if a company
has to vacate its premises due to disaster-related damage that is covered
under the property insurance policy. Business income insurance covers the
profits the company would have earned, based on financial records, had
the disaster not occurred. The policy also covers operating expenses, such
as electricity, that continue even though business activities have come to a
temporary halt.
  	 Extra	Income	Coverage: Reimburses the company for a reasonable sum of
money that it spends, over and above normal operating expenses, to avoid
having to shut down during the restoration period.
  	 Contingent	Business	Interruption	Insurance: Protects a businessowner’s
earnings following physical loss or damage to the property of the insured’s
suppliers or customers, as opposed to its own property.
Damage due to floods, earthquakes and acts of terrorism are generally not
covered by standard business property insurance but can be purchased through
various markets.
10

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

Protection Against Flood Damage
Property insurance policies usually exclude coverage for flood damage.
Businesses should find out from their local government office or commercial
bank whether their business is located in a flood zone and whether their location has been flooded in the past. Flood insurance is available through the federal government’s National Flood Insurance Program (www.FloodSmart.gov),
which is serviced by private carriers, and from a few specialty insurers.
Protection Against Earthquake Damage
Coverage for earthquake damage is excluded in most property insurance policies, including businessowners package policies. Businesses in an earthquakeprone area will need a special earthquake insurance policy or commercial property earthquake endorsement.
Protection Against Terrorist Attack Losses
Under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 and its extensions, only businesses that purchase optional terrorism coverage are covered for losses arising
from terrorist acts. The exception is workers compensation, which covers workrelated injuries and deaths including those due to acts of terrorism.
2. Liability Insurance
Any enterprise can be sued. Customers may claim that the business caused them
harm as the result of, for example, a defective product, an error in a service or
disregard for another person’s property. Or a claimant may allege that the business created a hazardous environment. Liability insurance pays damages for
which the business is found liable, up to the policy limits, as well as attorneys’
fees and other legal defense expenses. It also pays the medical bills of any people injured by, or on the premises of, the business.
A Commercial General Liability (CGL) insurance policy is the first line of
defense against many common claims. CGL policies cover claims in four basic
categories of business liability:
   Bodily injury
   Property damage
   Personal injury (including slander or libel)
   Advertising injury (damage from slander or false advertising)
In addition to covering claims listed above, CGL policies also cover the cost of
defending or settling claims. General liability insurance policies always state the
maximum amount that the insurer will pay during the policy period.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	11

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

There are two major forms of liability insurance policies a business can select:
occurrence and claims made. Both types of policies have their advantages.
  	 Occurrence	Policy: An occurrence policy covers a business for harm to
others caused by incidents that occurred while a policy is in force, no
matter when the claim is filed. For example, a person might sue a business
in 2010 for an injury stemming from a fall in 1999. The policy that was in
place when the incident occurred (i.e. 1999) will apply, even if the company
now has a policy in place with higher limits. Occurrence coverage may not
be available in some states or for some industries or professions.
  	 Claims	Made	Policy:	A claims made policy covers the business based on
the policy that is in force when the claim is made, regardless of when the
incident occurred. In the above example, the limits in the policy in effect
in 2010 would apply. Businesses with claims made policies can purchase
optional “tail coverage.” Tail coverage enables a business to report claims
after the policy has ended for alleged injuries that occurred while the policy
was in effect.
3. Commercial Vehicle Insurance
A commercial auto policy provides coverage for vehicles that are used primarily in connection with commercial establishments or business activities. The
insurance pays any costs to third parties resulting from bodily injury or property
damage for which the business is legally liable up to the policy limits.
While the major coverages are the same, commercial auto policies differs
from a personal auto policy in a number of technical respects. They may have
higher limits and/or provisions that cover rented and other non-owned vehicles,
including employees’ cars driven for company business. Several insurers offer
business auto policies geared to owners of small businesses or specific types of
businesses.
4. Workers Compensation Insurance
Employers have a legal responsibility to their employees to make the workplace
safe. However, despite precautions, accidents can occur. To protect employers
from lawsuits resulting from workplace accidents and to provide medical care
and compensation for lost income to employees hurt in workplace accidents,
in almost every state businesses are required by law to buy workers compensation insurance. Workers compensation insurance covers workers injured on the
job, whether they are hurt on the workplace premises or elsewhere, or in auto
accidents while on business. It also covers work-related illnesses. Workers com-

12

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

pensation provides payments to injured workers, without regard to who was at
fault in the accident, for time lost from work and for medical and rehabilitation
services. It also provides death benefits to surviving spouses and dependents.
Each state has different laws governing the amount and duration of lost income
benefits, the provision of medical and rehabilitation services and how the system is administered. For example, in most states there are regulations that cover
whether the worker or employer can choose the doctor who treats the injuries
and how disputes about benefits are resolved.
Workers compensation insurance must be bought as a separate policy.
In-home business and businessowners policies (BOPs) are sold as package policies but do not include coverage for workers’ injuries.
Other Types of Business Coverages

The first four coverages discussed below are different types of liability insurance
policies available to businesses. The fifth is a form of life insurance. There are
also specialized liability policies geared to specific types of businesses.
1. Errors and Omissions Insurance/Professional Liability
Some businesses involve services such as giving advice, making recommendations, designing things, providing physical care or representing the needs of
others, which can lead to being sued by customers, clients or patients claiming
that the business’ failure to perform a job properly has injured them. Errors and
omissions or professional liability insurance covers these situations. The policy
will pay any judgment for which the insured is legally liable, up to the policy
limit. It also provides legal defense costs, even when there has been no wrongdoing.
2. Employment Practices Liability Insurance
Employment practices liability insurance covers, up to the policy limits, damages for which an employer is legally liable such as violating an employee’s civil
or other legal rights. In addition to paying a judgment for which the insured is
liable, it also provides legal defense costs, which can be substantial even when
there has been no wrongdoing.
3. Directors and Officers Liability Insurance
Directors and officers liability insurance protects directors and officers of corporations or nonprofit organizations if there is a lawsuit claiming they managed
the business or organization without proper regard for the rights of others. The
policy will pay any judgment for which the insured is legally liable, up to the

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	13

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

policy limit. It also provides for legal defense costs, even where there has been
no wrongdoing.
4. Umbrella or Excess Policies
As the name implies, an umbrella liability policy provides coverage over and
above a business’s other liability coverages. It is designed to protect against
unusually high losses, providing protection when the policy limits of one of the
underlying policies have been used up. For a typical business, an umbrella policy would provide protection beyond Its general liability and auto liability policies. If a company has employment practices liability insurance, directors and
officers liability, or other types of liability insurance, the umbrella could provide
protection beyond those policy limits as well. Cost depends on the nature of the
business, its size, the type of risks the business faces and the ways the business
implements risk reduction.
5. Key Person Life Insurance
The loss of a key person can be a major blow to a small business if that person
is the founder of the business or is the key contact for customers and suppliers
and the management of the business. Loss of the key person may also make the
running of the business less efficient and result in a loss of capital. Losses caused
by the death of a key employee are insurable. Such policies compensate the
business against significant losses that result from that person’s death or disability. The amount and cost of insurance needed for a particular business depends
on the situation and the age, health and role of the key employee. Key employee life insurance pays a death benefit to the company when the key employee
dies. The policy is normally owned by the company, which pays the premiums
and is the beneficiary. The monies from key person insurance can be used to
buy back shares in a company from the estate of the deceased, pay a head hunting firm to find a suitable replacement and cover costs or expenses while the
business adjusts to the loss.
Package Policies

Commercial insurers sell coverages separately and/or offer policies that combine
protection from most major property and liability risks in one package. Package
policies are created for types of businesses that generally face the same kind and
degree of risk.
1. Packages for Small Businesses
Smaller companies often purchase a package policy known as the Business-

14

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Business Insurance

owners Policy, or BOP. A BOP is recommended for most small businesses (usually 100 employees or less), as it is often the most affordable way to obtain broad
coverage. BOPs are “off the shelf” policies combining many of the basic coverages needed by a typical small business into a standard package at a premium that
is generally less than would be required to purchase these coverages separately.
Combining both property and liability insurance, a BOP will cover a business in
the event of property damage, suspended operations, lawsuits resulting from
bodily injury or property damage to others, etc. BOPs do not cover professional
liability, auto insurance, workers compensation or health and disability insurance. Small businesses will need separate insurance policies to cover professional
services, vehicles and employees.
2. Commercial Multiple Peril Policies
Larger companies might purchase a commercial package policy or customize
their policies to meet the special risks they face. Commercial multiple peril policies, often purchased by corporations, bundle property, boiler and machinery,
crime and general liability coverage together. Larger firms employee a risk manager to help determine the company’s exposure to certain risks.
3. In-Home Business Policies
There are several insurance options designed to address the special needs of
home businesses.
  	 Homeowners	Policy	Endorsement: Homeowners may be able to add a
simple endorsement or rider to their existing homeowners policy to increase
coverage.
  	 In-Home	Business	Policy:	An in-home business policy provides more
comprehensive coverage for business equipment and liability than a
homeowners policy endorsement. Many insurance companies offer
insurance policies specifically tailored to small business.
  	 Businessowners	Policy	(BOP): The home business might be eligible for
The Businessowners Policy (BOP), see above. The key to whether a business
owner is eligible for a BOP is the size of the premises, the limits of liability
required, the type of commercial operation it is and the extent of its
off-premises servicing and processing activities. A BOP, like an in-home
business policy, covers business property and equipment, loss of income,
extra expense and liability; however, the BOP provides these coverages on a
much broader scale.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	15

 
Insurance Basics
Life Insurance

Life Insurance Basics
Many financial experts consider life insurance to be the cornerstone of sound
financial planning. It can be an important tool in the following situations:
1. Replace Income for Dependents
If people depend on an individual’s income, life insurance can replace that
income if the person dies. The most common example of this is parents with
young children. Insurance to replace income can be especially useful if the
government- or employer-sponsored benefits of the surviving spouse or
domestic partner will be reduced after he or she dies.
2. Pay Final Expenses
Life insurance can pay funeral and burial costs, probate and other estate administration costs, debts and medical expenses not covered by health insurance.
3. Create an Inheritance for Heirs
Even those with no other assets to pass on, can create an inheritance by buying
a life insurance policy and naming their heirs as beneficiaries.
4. Pay Federal “Death” Taxes and State “Death” Taxes
Life insurance benefits can pay for estate taxes so that heirs will not have to liquidate other assets or take a smaller inheritance. Changes in the federal “death”
tax rules through January 1, 2011 will likely lessen the impact of this tax on
some people, but some states are offsetting those federal decreases with increases in their state-level estate taxes.
5. Make Significant Charitable Contributions
By making a charity the beneficiary of their life insurance policies, individuals
can make a much larger contribution than if they donated the cash equivalent
of the policy’s premiums.
6. Create a Source of Savings
Some types of life insurance create a cash value that, if not paid out as a death
benefit, can be borrowed or withdrawn on the owner’s request. Since most
people make paying their life insurance policy premiums a high priority, buying
a cash-value type policy can create a kind of “forced” savings plan. Furthermore,
the interest credited is tax deferred (and tax exempt if the money is paid as a
death claim).

16

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Life Insurance

Types of Life Insurance
There are two major types of life insurance: term and whole life.
1. Term Life
Term insurance is the simplest form of life insurance. It pays only if death
occurs during the term of the policy, which is usually from one to 30 years.
Most term policies have no other benefit provisions. There are two basic types
of term life insurance policies: level term and decreasing term. Level term means
that the death benefit stays the same throughout the duration of the policy.
Decreasing term means that the death benefit drops, usually in one-year increments, over the course of the policy’s term.
2. Whole Life/Permanent Life
Whole life or permanent insurance pays a death benefit whenever the policyholder dies. There are three major types of whole life or permanent life insurance—traditional whole life, universal life, and variable universal life, and there
are variations within each type.
In the case of traditional whole life, both the death benefit and the premium are designed to stay the same (level) throughout the life of the policy. The
cost per $1,000 of benefit increases as the insured person ages, and it obviously
gets very high when the insured lives to 80 and beyond. The insurance company keeps the premium level by charging a premium that, in the early years, is
higher than what is needed to pay claims, investing that money, and then using
it to supplement the level premium to help pay the cost of life insurance for
older people.
By law, when these “overpayments” reach a certain amount, they must be
available to the policyholder as a cash value if he or she decides not to continue
with the original plan. The cash value is an alternative, not an additional, benefit under the policy. In the 1970s and 1980s, life insurance companies introduced two variations on the traditional whole life product: universal life insurance and variable universal life insurance.
Some varieties of whole life/permanent life insurance are discussed below.
  	 Universal	Life: Universal life, also known as adjustable life, allows more
flexibility than traditional whole life policies. The savings vehicle (called a
cash value account) generally earns a money market rate of interest. After
money has accumulated in the account, the policyholder will also have the
option of altering premium payments—providing there is enough money in
the account to cover the costs.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	17

 
Insurance Basics
Life Insurance

  	 Variable	Life: Variable life policies combine death protection with a
savings account that can be invested in stocks, bonds and money market
mutual funds. The value of the policy may grow more quickly, but involves
more risk. If investments do not perform well, the cash value and death
benefit may decrease. Some policies, however, guarantee that the death
benefit will not fall below a minimum level.
  	 Variable	Universal	Life: This type of policy combines the features of
variable and universal life policies, including the investment risks and
rewards characteristic of variable life insurance and the ability to adjust
premiums and the death benefit that is characteristic of universal life
insurance.

18

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Annuities

Annuities Basics
Annuities are financial products intended to enhance retirement security. An
annuity is an agreement for one person or organization to pay another a series
of payments. Usually the term “annuity” relates to a contract between an individual and a life insurance company.
There are many categories of annuities. They can be classified by:
  	 Nature	of	the	underlying	investment:	fixed or variable
  	 Primary	purpose:	accumulation or pay-out (deferred or immediate)
  	 Nature	of	payout	commitment:	fixed period, fixed amount or lifetime
  	 Tax	status:	qualified or nonqualified
  	 Premium	payment	arrangement:	single premium or flexible premium
An annuity can be classified in several of these categories at once. For example, an
individual might buy a nonqualified single premium deferred variable annuity.
In general, annuities have the following features:
1. Tax Deferral on Investment Earnings
Many investments are taxed year by year, but the investment earnings—capital
gains and investment income—in annuities are not taxable until the investor
withdraws money. This tax deferral is also true of 401(k)s and IRAs; however,
unlike these products, there are no limits on the amount one can put into an
annuity. Moreover, the minimum withdrawal requirements for annuities are
much more liberal than they are for 401(k)s and IRAs.
2. Protection from Creditors
People who own an immediate annuity (that is, who are receiving money from
an insurance company), are afforded some protection from creditors. Generally
the most that creditors can access is the payments as they are made, since the
money the annuity owner gave the insurance company now belongs to the
company. Some state statutes and court decisions also protect some or all of the
payments from those annuities.
3. A Variety of Investment Options
Many annuity companies offer an array of investment options. For example,
individuals can invest in a fixed annuity that credits a specified interest rate,
similar to a bank Certificate of Deposit (CD). If they buy a variable annuity,
their money can be invested in stocks, bonds or mutual funds. In recent years,
annuity companies have created various types of “floors” that limit the extent
of investment decline from an increasing reference point.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	19

 
Insurance Basics
Annuities

4. Taxfree Transfers Among Investment Options
In contrast to mutual funds and other investments made with aftertax money,
with annuities there are no tax consequences if owners change how their funds
are invested. This can be particularly valuable if they are using a strategy called
“rebalancing,” which is recommended by many financial advisors. Under rebalancing, investors shift their investments periodically to return them to the
proportions that represent the risk/return combination most appropriate for the
investor’s situation.
5. Lifetime Income
A lifetime immediate annuity converts an investment into a stream of payments that last until the annuity owner dies. In concept, the payments come
from three “pockets”: The original investment, investment earnings and money
from a pool of people in the investors group who do not live as long as actuarial
tables forecast. The pooling is unique to annuities, and it is what enables annuity companies to be able to guarantee a lifetime income.
6. Benefits to Heirs
There is a common apprehension that if an individual starts an immediate
lifetime annuity and dies soon after that, the insurance company keeps all of
the investment in the annuity. To prevent this situation individuals can buy a
“guaranteed period” with the immediate annuity. A guaranteed period commits
the insurance company to continue payments after the owner dies to one or
more designated beneficiaries; the payments continue to the end of the stated
guaranteed period—usually 10 or 20 years (measured from when the owner
started receiving the annuity payments). Moreover, annuity benefits that pass
to beneficiaries do not go through probate and are not governed by the annuity
owner’s will.
Types of Annuities

There are two major types of annuities: fixed and variable. Fixed annuities guarantee the principal and a minimum rate of interest. Generally, interest credited
and payments made from a fixed annuity are based on rates declared by the
company, which can change only yearly. Fixed annuities are considered “general
account” assets. In contrast, variable annuity account values and payments are
based on the performance of a separate investment portfolio, thus their value
may fluctuate daily. Variable annuities are considered “separate account” assets.
There are a variety of fixed annuities and variable annuities. One example,
the equity indexed annuity, is a hybrid of the features of fixed and variable
20

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Annuities

annuities. It credits a minimum rate of interest, just as other fixed annuities do,
but its value is also based on the performance of a specified stock index—usually computed as a fraction of that index’s total return. In December 2008 the
Securities and Exchange Commission voted to reclassify indexed annuities (with
some exceptions) as securities, not insurance products. Annuities can also be
classified by marketing channel, in other words whether they are sold to groups
or individuals.
Annuities can be deferred or immediate. Deferred annuities generally accumulate assets over a long period of time, with withdrawals usually as a single
sum or as an income payment beginning at retirement. Immediate annuities
allow purchasers to convert a lump sum payment into a stream of income that
the policyholder begins to receive right away.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	21

 
Insurance Basics
Long-Term Care Insurance

Long-Term Care Insurance Basics
Long-term care insurance pays for services to help individuals who are unable to
perform certain activities of daily living without assistance, or require supervision due to a cognitive impairment such as Alzheimer’s disease.
Features of Long-Term Care Policies

The best policies pay for care in a nursing home, assisted living facility, or at
home. Benefits are typically expressed in daily amounts, with a lifetime maximum. Some policies pay half as much per day for at-home care as for nursing
home care. Others pay the same amount, or have a “pool of benefits” that can
be used as needed.
Criteria for the Beginning of Payments

The policy should state the various conditions that must be met. They can
include:
1. The Inability to Perform Two or Three Specific “Activities of Daily Living”
Without Help
These include bathing, dressing, eating, toileting and “transferring” or being
able to move from place to place or between a bed and a chair.
2. Cognitive Impairment
Most policies cover stroke and Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, but other
forms of mental incapacity may be excluded.
3. Medical Necessity or Certification by a Doctor that Long-Term Care is
Necessary
Most policies have a “waiting period” or “elimination” period. This is a period
that begins when an individual first needs long-term care and lasts as long as
the policy provides. During the waiting period, the policy will not pay benefits.
The policy pays only for expenses that occur after the waiting period is over,
if the policyholder continues to need care. In general, the longer the waiting
period, the lower the premium for the long-term care policy.
Benefit periods for long-term care may range from two years to a lifetime.
Premiums can be kept down by electing coverage for three to four years—longer
than the average nursing home stay—instead of a lifetime.
Most long-term care policies pay on a reimbursement (or expense-incurred)
basis, up to the policy limits. In other words, if the policy has a $150 per day
benefit, but the policyholder spends only $130 per day for a home long-term
care provider, the policy will pay only $130. The “extra” $20 each day will, in
22

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Long-Term Care Insurance

some policies, go into a “pool” of unused funds that can be used to extend the
length of time for which the policy will pay benefits. Other policies pay on an
indemnity basis. Using the same example as above, an indemnity policy would
pay $150 per day as long as the insured needs and receives long-term care services, regardless of the actual outlay.
Inflation protection is an important feature, especially for people under the
age of 65, who are buying benefits that they may not use for 20 years or more.
A good inflation provision compounds benefits at 5 percent a year. Without
inflation protection, even 3 percent annual inflation will, over 24 years, reduce
the purchasing power of a $150 daily benefit to the equivalent of $75.
Six Other Important Policy Provisions

1. Elimination Period
Under some policies, if the insured has qualifying long-term care expenses
on one day during a seven-day period, he or she will be credited with having
satisfied seven days toward the elimination period: i.e., the time between an
injury and the receipt of payments. This type of provision reflects the way
home care is often delivered—some days by professionals and some days by
family members.
2. Guaranteed Renewable Policies
These must be renewed by the insurance company, although premiums can go
up if they are increased for an entire class of policyholders.
3. Waiver of Premium
This provision ensures that no further premiums are due once the policyholder
starts to receive benefits.
4. Third-Party Notification
This provision stipulates that a relative, friend or professional adviser will be
notified if the policyholder forgets to pay a premium.
5. Nonforfeiture Benefits
These benefits keep a lesser amount of insurance in force if the policyholder lets
the coverage lapse. This provision is required by some states.
6. Restoration of Benefits
This provision ensures that maximum benefits are put back in place if the
policyholder receives benefits for a time, then recovers and goes for a specified
period (typically six months) without receiving benefits.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	23

 
Insurance Basics
Disability Insurance

Disability Insurance Basics
Disabling injuries affect millions of Americans each year. Disability insurance,
which complements health insurance, helps replace lost income if an individual
is unable to work due to a disability.
There are three basic ways to replace income.
1. Employer-Paid Disability Insurance
This is required in most states. Most employers provide some short-term sick
leave. Many larger employers provide long-term disability coverage as well, typically with benefits of up to 60 percent of salary lasting for a period of up to five
years until the age of 65, and in some cases extended for life.
2. Social Security Disability Benefits
This is paid to workers whose disability is expected to last at least 12 months
and is so severe that no gainful employment can be expected.
3. Individual Disability Income Insurance Policies
Other limited replacement income is available for workers under some circumstances from workers compensation (if the injury or illness is job-related), auto
insurance (if disability results from an auto accident) and the Department of
Veterans Affairs. For most workers, even those with some employer-paid coverage, an individual disability income policy is the best way to ensure adequate
income in the event of disability. Workers who buy a private disability income
policy can expect to replace from 50 percent to 70 percent of income. Disability
benefits paid out on individual disability policies are not taxed; benefits from
employer-paid policies are subject to income tax.
Types of Disability Insurance

There are two types of disability policies: Short-term disability and Long-term
disability. Short-term policies have a waiting period of 0 to 14 days with a
maximum benefit period of no longer than two years. Long-term policies have
a waiting period of several weeks to several months with a maximum benefit
period ranging from a few years to a lifetime.
Disability policies have two different protection features: noncancelable and
guaranteed renewable. Noncancelable means that the policy cannot be canceled
by the insurance company, except for nonpayment of premiums. This gives the
policyholder the right to renew the policy every year without an increase in the
premium or a reduction in benefits. Guaranteed renewable gives the policyholder the right to renew the policy with the same benefits and not have the policy
24
24

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Basics
Disability Insurance

canceled by the company. However, the insurer has the right to increase premiums as long as it does so for all other policyholders in the same rating class.
There are several options and factors to consider when purchasing a disability policy.
1. Additional Purchase Options
The insurance company gives the policyholder the right to buy additional insurance at a later time.
2. Coordination of Benefits
The amount of benefits policyholders receive from their insurance companies
is dependent on other benefits they receive because of the disability. The policy
specifies a target amount the policyholder will receive from all the policies combined and will make up the difference not paid by other policies.
3. Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA)
The COLA increases disability benefits over time based on the increased cost of
living measured by the Consumer Price Index. Policyholders will pay a higher
premium if they select the COLA.
4. Residual or Partial Disability Rider
This provision allows workers to return to work part-time, collecting part of
their salaries and receiving a partial disability payment if they are still partially
disabled.
5. Return of Premium
This provision requires the insurance company to refund part of the premium if
no claims are made for a specific period of time declared in the policy.
6. Waiver of Premium Provision
This clause means that the policyholder does not have to pay premiums on the
policy after he or she is disabled for 90 days.
Factors Affecting the Choice of a Disability Policy

1. Definition of Disability
Some policies pay benefits if workers are unable to perform the customary duties
of their own occupation. Others pay only if workers are unable to perform any
job suitable for their level of education and experience. Some policies define
disability in terms of workers’ occupations for an initial period of two or three
years and then continue to pay benefits only if they are unable to perform any
occupation. “Own occupation” policies are more desirable, but more expensive.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	25
25

 
Insurance Basics
Disablity Insurance

2. Benefit Period
The benefit period is the amount of time policyholders will receive monthly
benefits during their lifetimes. Experts usually recommend that the policy pay
benefits until at least age 65, at which point Social Security disability will take
over. Young people may consider buying a policy offering lifetime benefits
because it will still be relatively inexpensive.
3. Replacement Percentage
A policy that will replace from 60 percent to 70 percent of total taxable earnings
is advisable. A higher replacement percentage, if available, is more expensive.
Other sources of income should be evaluated before deciding how much disability coverage is needed.
4. Coverage for Disability Resulting from Either Accidental Injury or Illness
An accident-only policy is less expensive but does not provide adequate protection. Ideally, both accident and illness coverage should be purchased.
5. A Cost-of-Living Increase in Benefits
Policies may not pay benefits for a decade or more and should keep pace with
increases in the cost of living. (Some companies also offer “indexed” benefits,
keeping pace with inflation after benefit payments begin.)
6. A Policy Paying “Residual” or Partial Benefits
This type of policy is available so that people can work part-time and still
receive a benefit making up for lost income. A standard feature in some policies,
and added by a rider to others, a residual benefits policy pays partial benefits
based on loss of income without an initial period of total disability.
7. Transition Benefits
Offered by some companies, it can offset financial loss during a post-disability
period of rebuilding a business or professional practice.
8. Ongoing Coverage
A noncancelable policy will continue in-force as long as the premiums are paid;
neither the benefit nor the premium can change. A guaranteed renewable policy
keeps the same benefits but may cost more over time since the insurer can
increase the premium if it is increased for an entire class of policyholders.
9. Financial Stability
Check the financial stability of insurers through an agent or a ratings firm.

26

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
s

c
Topi

These Topics are adapted from papers
regularly updated at www.iii.org/issues_updates.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	27

 
28

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Captives and Other Risk-Financing Options

Captives and Other Risk-Financing Options
Traditionally, businesses and other organizations have handled risk by transferring it to an insurance company through the purchase of an insurance policy or,
alternatively, by retaining the risk and allocating funds to meet expected losses
through an arrangement known as “self insurance,” in which firms retain rather
than transfer risk.
During the liability crisis of the 1980s, when businesses had trouble obtaining some types of commercial insurance coverage, new mechanisms for transferring risk developed, facilitated by passage of the Product Liability Risk Retention
Act of 1981. These so-called alternative risk transfer (ART) arrangements blend
risk transfer and risk retention mechanisms and, together with self insurance,
form the alternative market.
Captives—a special type of insurance company set up by a parent company,
trade association or group of companies to insure the risks of its owner or owners—and risk-retention groups—in which entities in a common industry join
together to provide members with liability insurance—were the first mechanisms to appear. Other options, including risk retention pools and large deductible plans, a form of self insurance, followed.
ART products, such as catastrophe bonds, weather derivatives and microinsurance programs are also emerging as an alternative to traditional insurance
and reinsurance products.
Alternative Market Mechanisms

I. Captives
Wholly owned captives are companies set up by large corporations to finance or
administer their risk financing needs. If such a captive insures only the risks of
its parent or subsidiaries it is called a “pure” captive.
Captives may be established to provide insurance to more than one entity.
An association or group of companies may band together to form a captive to
provide insurance coverage. Professionals—doctors, lawyers, accountants—have
formed many captives over the years. Captives may, in turn, use a variety of
reinsurance mechanisms to provide the coverage. In particular, many offshore
captives use a “fronting” insurer to provide the basic insurance policy. Fronting
typically means that underwriting, claims and administrative functions are
handled in the United States by an experienced commercial insurance company,
since a captive generally will not want to get involved directly in running the
insurance operation. Also, fronting allows a company to show it has an insur	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	29

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Captives and Other Risk-Financing Options

ance policy with a U.S.-licensed insurance company, which it may need to do
for legal and business reasons.
The rent-a-captive concept was introduced in Bermuda 20 years ago and
remains a popular alternative market mechanism. Rent-a-captives serve businesses that are unable to capitalize a captive but are willing to assume a portion
of their own risk and share in the underwriting profits and investment income.
Generally sponsored by insurers or reinsurers, which essentially “rent out” their
capital for a fee, the mechanism allows users to obtain some of the advantages
of a captive without having the expense of setting up a single parent captive
and meeting minimum capital and surplus requirements.
Captives have been expanding into the employee benefits arena since
2003, the year in which the Department of Labor gave final approval to Archer
Daniels Midland Co.’s plan to use its Vermont captive to reinsure group life
insurance benefits.
While the leading domicile for captives in the U.S. is Vermont, offshore
captives covering U.S. risks are predominantly located in Bermuda, where
they enjoy tax advantages and relative freedom from regulation. The Cayman
Islands, Guernsey, the British Virgin Islands, Luxembourg and Barbados are also
significant centers for captives. Vermont is the leading domicile for captives in
the United States.
II. Self Insurance
Self insurance can be undertaken by single companies wishing to retain risk or
by entities in similar industries or geographic locations that pool resources to
insure each other’s risks.
The use of higher retentions/deductibles is increasing in most lines of insurance. In workers compensation many companies are opting to retain a larger
portion of their exposure through policies with large deductible amounts of
$100,000 or higher. Large deductible programs, which were first introduced in
1989, now account for a sizable portion of the market.
III. Risk Retention Groups
A risk retention group (RRG) is a corporation owned and operated by its members. It must be chartered and licensed as a liability insurance company under
the laws of at least one state. The group can then write insurance in all other
states. It need not obtain a license in a state other than its chartering states.

30

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Captives and Other Risk-Financing Options

IV. Risk Purchasing Groups
Like risk retention groups (RRGs), purchasing groups must be made up of persons or entities with like exposures and in a common business. However, whereas RRGs are liability insurance companies owned by their members, purchasing
groups purchase liability coverage for their members from admitted insurers,
surplus lines carriers or RRGs. Laws in some states prohibit insurers from giving groups formed to purchase insurance advantages over individuals. However,
purchasing groups are not subject to so-called “fictitious group” laws, which
require a group to have been in existence for a certain period of time or require
a group to have a certain minimum number of members. The Risk Retention
Act of 1986 specifically provided for purchasing groups to be created to purchase liability insurance for members of the sponsoring groups.
V. Catastrophe Bonds and other Alternative Risk Transfer (ART) Products
A number of alternative risk transfer (ART) products, such as insurance-linked
securities and weather derivatives have developed to meet the financial risk
transfer needs of businesses. One such product, catastrophe (cat) bonds, riskbased securities sold via the capital markets, developed in the wake of hurricanes Andrew and Iniki in 1992 and the Northridge earthquake in 1994—megacatastrophes that resulted in a global shortage of reinsurance (insurance for
insurers) for such disasters. Tapping into the capital markets allowed insurers
to diversify their risk and expand the amount of insurance available in catastrophe-prone areas. Zurich Financial’s Kamp Re was the first major catastrophe
bond to be triggered. The $190 million bond was triggered by 2005’s Hurricane
Katrina, and resulted in a total loss of principal. Catastrophe bonds are now a
multibillion dollar industry.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	31

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Catastrophes: Insurance Issues

Catastrophes: Insurance Issues
The term “catastrophe” in the property insurance industry denotes a natural or
man-made disaster that is unusually severe. An event is designated a catastrophe
by the industry when claims are expected to reach a certain dollar threshold,
currently set at $25 million, and more than a certain number of policyholders
and insurance companies are affected.
The magnitude of the damage caused by Katrina and the potential damage Hurricane Rita might have caused had it not weakened from an intense
Category 5 hurricane has triggered a reexamination, not just among insurers
and reinsurers but also among public policy and political leaders, of how the
United States deals with the financial consequences of such massive property
damage and personal loss.
Disaster losses along the coast are likely to escalate in the coming years,
in part because of huge increases in development. One catastrophe modeling
company predicts that catastrophe losses will double every decade or so due
to growing residential and commercial density and more expensive buildings.
Data from the Census Bureau, collected by USA Today, show that in 2006, 34.9
million people were seriously threatened by Atlantic hurricanes, compared with
10.2 million in 1950. Before the 2005 hurricane season, Hurricane Andrew
ranked as the single most costly U.S. natural disaster.
Man-made catastrophes such as the attacks on the World Trade Center
can also cause huge losses. The attacks led Congress to pass the Terrorism Risk
Insurance Act (TRIA) in November 2002. Since then, TRIA has been reauthorized
twice. The latest reauthorization, passed at the end of 2007, extends the law to
2014. TRIA provides a federal backstop for commercial insurance losses from
terrorist acts, making it easier for insurers to calculate their maximum losses
for such a catastrophe and thus to underwrite the coverage, see the topic on
Terrorism Risk and Insurance.
The typical homeowners insurance policy covers damage from a fire,
windstorms, hail, riots and explosions—as well as other types of loss such as
theft and the cost of living elsewhere while the structure is being repaired or
rebuilt after being damaged. Commercial property insurance policies generally
cover the same causes of loss with some variation, depending on the coverages
selected. Flood and earthquake damage are excluded under homeowners policies—separate policies are available—but are covered under the comprehensive
portion of the standard auto policy, which more than 75 percent of drivers who
buy auto liability insurance purchase.
The insurance industry tracks catastrophes to monitor claim costs, assign32

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Catastrophes: Insurance Issues

ing a number to each catastrophe. Each claim arising from the event is tagged
so that total industrywide losses can be tabulated. The term catastrophe is often
used in the property insurance industry in a narrow way to mean a catastrophic
event that exceeds a dollar threshold in claims payouts. This figure has changed
over the years with inflation and the increase in development of areas subject to
natural disasters. Starting in 1997 the catastrophe definition was raised from $5
million to $25 million in insured damage.
There have been four catastrophes that fall into the megacatastrophe category, greatly exceeding the $25 million threshold. The first two, Hurricane Andrew
(1992) and the Northridge earthquake (1994), were both watershed events in
that they were far more destructive than most experts had predicted a disaster
of this type would be. The third, the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center
in 2001, altered insurers’ attitudes about man-made risks worldwide. Hurricane
Katrina (2005), the fourth catastrophe, is not only the most expensive natural
disaster on record but also an event that intensified discussion nationwide about
the way disasters, natural and man-made, are managed. It also focused attention
on the federal flood insurance program, see the topic on Flood Insurance.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	33

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Cellphones and Driving

Cellphones and Driving
Increased reliance on cellphones has led to a rise in the number of people who
use the devices while driving. There are two dangers associated with driving
and cellphone use, including text messaging. First, drivers must take their eyes
off the road while dialing. Second, people can become so absorbed in their
conversations that their ability to concentrate on the act of driving is severely
impaired, jeopardizing the safety of vehicle occupants and pedestrians. Since
the first law was passed in New York in 2001 banning hand-held cellphone use
while driving, there has been debate as to the exact nature and degree of hazard.
The latest research shows that while using a cellphone when driving may not
be the most dangerous distraction, because it is so prevalent it is by far the most
common distraction in crashes and near crashes.
Research: Studies about cellphone use while driving have focused on several
different aspects of the problem. Some have looked at its prevalence as the leading cause of driver distraction. Others have looked at the different risks associated with hand-held and hands-free devices. Still others have focused on the seriousness of injuries in crashes involving cellphone users and the demographics
of drivers who use cellphones. Of increasing concern is the practice of texting.
In January 2010 the National Safety Council (NSC) released a report that
estimates that at least 1.6 million crashes (28 percent of all crashes) are caused
each year by drivers talking on cellphones (1.4 million crashes) and texting
(200,000 crashes). The estimate is based on data of driver cellphone use from
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and from peer-reviewed
research that quantifies the risks using cellphones and texting while driving.
In July 2009 Virginia Tech Transportation Institute released a study showing that the risk of texting while driving is far greater than previous estimates
showed and far exceeds the hazards associated with other driving distractions.
Researchers used cameras in the cabs of trucks traveling long distances over a
period of 18 months and found that the collision risk became 23 times higher
when the drivers were texting. The research also measured the time drivers
stopped looking at the road and used their eyes to send or receive texts. Drivers
generally spent nearly five seconds looking at their devices before a crash or
near crash, a period long enough for a vehicle to travel more than 100 yards at
typical highway speeds.

34

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Climate Change: Insurance Issues

Climate Change: Insurance Issues
There is now a consensus among the scientific community that the climate
is changing, with potential risk to the global economy, ecology, and human
health and well being. But how much of this is due to natural phenomena and
how much to the effects of human activity is a matter of debate. Also unknown
is the extent to which weather patterns have already been affected.
As assumers of risk, insurers seek to mitigate potential losses every day
through a process known as risk management. Since climate change could
lead to losses on a scale never before experienced, insurers are not waiting for
researchers to produce all the answers. A 2009 report by Ceres, a network of
companies concerned about global warming, identified some 244 insurancerelated organizations in 29 countries that were working in 2008 to find solutions to the threat posed by greenhouse gas emissions, up from 190 groups
in 26 countries in 2007. Insurers are also redoubling their efforts in the more
traditional areas of risk management, including alerting policyholders to the
potential for lawsuits for failure to protect against or disclose possible harm to
the environment.
Meanwhile, society’s concern about climate change offers insurers new avenues for leadership and new opportunities for innovative products.
Global Warming: When fossil fuels—coal, oil and natural gas—are burned to
produce energy, so-called greenhouse gases, largely carbon dioxide, are emitted
into the atmosphere where they trap heat. Forests and oceans can absorb some
of the carbon. But to avoid the most catastrophic effects of what is predicted
to occur, researchers say, carbon emissions must be greatly reduced, hence
the push to reduce overall energy use, boost the use of energy from renewable
sources such as solar heat and curb the use of paper and other products made
from trees, which absorb carbon dioxide in the process of photosynthesis.

Global warming has the potential to affect most segments of the insurance
business, including life insurance if rising temperatures lead to an up-tick in
death rates. Property losses of all kinds are most likely to increase, and there is
the potential for much higher commercial liability losses if shareholders and
consumers try to hold businesses responsible for changes to the environment.
Insurers’ Contribution to Lowering Greenhouse Gases: Insurers, like compa-

nies in other industries, are promoting strategies to lower greenhouse gas emissions. Some insurers have been warning public policy leaders and the general
public about the threat of climate change for years, and others were among the
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	35

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Climate Change: Insurance Issues

first to adopt public statements on the environment and climate change and to
join business coalitions calling on the federal government to enact legislation to
reduce greenhouse gases. Some, particularly reinsurers, are sponsoring research
and working with others interested in the same kind of solutions, such as finding ways for individuals and society to adapt to extreme weather, particularly in
developing countries.
Many insurance companies are committed to reducing their own total
greenhouse gas emissions and offsetting the remainder through contributions to
reforestation and renewable energy projects. They also encourage their employees to adopt “green” policies in their private lives. Some were involved in projects to reduce greenhouse gases even before such efforts gained widespread public attention, and many are now reinforcing their policyholders’ desire to reduce
their carbon footprints by offering them paperless billing and documentation.
Some have upgraded the quality of their Web sites to encourage policyholders
to transact business electronically. At least one auto insurer sells policies exclusively online.
Insurers are also working on another front: seeking to reduce the incidence
and cost of property damage caused by those events that still occur, despite society’s best efforts to reduce greenhouse gases.
New Products and Business Opportunities: Without insurance the economy

could not function. Insurers essentially enable new products and services to
be created by assuming the risk of loss. Just as they quickly adapted existing
liability insurance policies for horse-drawn carriages, or teams of horses, to automobiles towards the end of the nineteenth century, so they are responding to
climate change initiatives at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Opportunities exist on several fronts. First, there are new risks to insure,
including new industries such as wind farms and other alternative fuel facilities,
and emerging financial risks such as those involved in carbon trading. Insurance
policies related to carbon trading protect those that invest in clean technology projects against failure of the project to deliver the agreed-upon emission
rights. A number of companies are also offering their clients carbon project risk
management consulting services. A carbon credit permits the holder to emit one
ton of carbon. The Kyoto Protocol and other cap and trade systems now under
discussion set ceilings for carbon output and allow those that produce less than
the limit to sell credits to those that exceed it. Investors in clean technology
projects such as reforestation and renewable energy buy the rights to credits and
sell them in the international carbon trading market. Among the risks associated
36

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Climate Change: Insurance Issues

with purchasing carbon trading rights is that the technology/project designed
to reduce carbon emissions will not meet expectations or that the company
will become insolvent before it is able to fulfill its contract, leaving the investor
without the necessary carbon offsets.
Second, the need to curb global warming has spurred the creation of insurance policies that provide incentives to policyholders to contribute to these
efforts. These include discounts on auto insurance policies for owning a hybrid
car and for driving fewer miles and policies for green building construction.
Auto Insurance Initiatives: Motor vehicles account for more than 25 percent

of all U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Insurance policies such as pay-as-youdrive, which factors mileage driven into the price of insurance, and hybrid car
discounts could reduce that amount by more than 10 percent if broadly implemented, according to Ceres, a network of companies concerned about global
warming. A study by the Brookings Institution suggests that if drivers paid by
the mile, driving would drop by about 8 percent.
There are two ways to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions associated with
driving. One is to encourage people to purchase vehicles that emit less carbon
dioxide into the environment and get more miles per gallon of gasoline. A
number of companies offer discounts to people who drive hybrid vehicles—
some believe that people who are socially responsible are also more responsible
behind the wheel. The other way is to reward people for driving fewer miles,
known as pay-as-you-drive (PAYD) auto insurance. Several insurers have developed technology-based discount programs that provide financial incentives to
drive fewer miles. Mileage information comes from a special device. In some,
it is linked to the car’s odometer and in others it is a wireless sensor that can
monitor speed as well as mileage. These programs are offered in a growing number of states. In addition, California and several other states are encouraging the
development of PAYD programs.
Insurers are helping to promote sustainable building practices by offering
green homeowners and commercial property policies. In addition, they are
responding to the growing demand for assistance with energy and emissionsreduction projects with risk management services that address global warming.
“Green” Building Insurance Coverage: Increasingly, homeowners at the lead-

ing edge of the environmental sustainability movement are generating their
own geothermal, solar or wind power and selling any surplus energy back to
the local power grid. Several insurers are supporting this trend by offering a
homeowners policy that covers both the income lost when there is a power
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	37

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Climate Change: Insurance Issues

outage from a covered peril and the extra expense to the homeowner of buying
electricity from another source. Policies generally cover the cost of getting back
online, such as utility charges for inspection and reconnection.
Some insurers offer homeowners insurance policies that, in the event of a
fire or other disaster, allow policyholders to rebuild to environmentally responsible “green” standards, even if they had not purchased such a policy originally.
Green standards, part of the sustainability movement, include energy conservation benchmarks and the use of renewable construction materials. The Green
Building Council introduced its Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) certification program in 2001. According to Ceres, buildings account for
more than one-third of greenhouse gas emissions and green building practices
can reduce energy use and emissions by more than 50 percent.
With green commercial building construction expected to rise significantly
over the next few years, a growing number of insurers are offering green commercial property insurance policies and endorsements, some of which are directed at specific segments of the business community such as manufacturers. The
first green commercial policy was introduced in 2006.
In general, the policies allow building owners to replace damaged buildings,
whether or not they are already certified green, with green alternatives including energy efficient electrical equipment and interior lighting, water conserving
plumbing, and nontoxic and low odor paints and carpeting. They also may pay
for engineering inspections of heating, ventilation, air conditioning systems,
building recertification fees, the replacement of vegetative or plant covered roofs
and debris recycling. Some cover the income lost and costs incurred when alternative energy generating equipment is damaged.

38

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Auto
Credit
Insurance
Scoring

Credit Scoring
The goal of every insurance company is to correlate rates for insurance policies
as closely as possible with the actual cost of claims. If insurers set rates too high
they will lose market share to competitors who have more accurately matched
rates to expected costs. If they set rates too low they will lose money. This continuous search for accuracy is good for consumers as well as insurance companies. The majority of consumers benefit because they are not subsidizing people
who are worse insurance risks—people who are more likely to file claims than
they are.
The computerization of data has brought more accuracy, speed and efficiency to businesses of all kinds. In the insurance arena, credit information has
been used for decades to help underwriters decide whether to accept or reject
applications for insurance. New advances in information technology have led to
the development of insurance scores, which enable insurers to better assess the
risk of future claims.
An insurance score is a numerical ranking based on a person’s credit history.
Actuarial studies show that how a person manages his or her financial affairs,
which is what an insurance score indicates, is a good predictor of insurance
claims. Insurance scores are used to help insurers differentiate between lower
and higher insurance risks and thus charge a premium equal to the risk they are
assuming. Statistically, people who have a poor insurance score are more likely
to file a claim.
Insurance scores do not include data on race or income because insurers do
not collect this information from applicants for insurance.
The Poor Economy Has Not Had a Negative Impact on Credit Scores:
According to an April 2009 Property Casualty Insurers of America (PCI) release,
the recent economic downturn did not have the negative effect on credit scores
that some people predicted. Major consumer credit reporting agencies such
as Fair Isaac and TransUnion have reported that average scores remain steady
or have improved, possibly because consumers are saving more and paying
off debt. Despite the economy and credit crisis, no state has made regulatory
changes to insurers’ use of insurance scores, PCI notes.
Federal Activities: The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has asked nine of
the largest homeowners insurance companies to provide information that it says
will allow it to determine how consumer credit data are used by the companies
in underwriting and rate setting. The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act,
passed in 2003, directed the FTC to consult with the Office of Fair Housing and
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	39

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Credit
Auto Insurance
Scoring

Equal Opportunity on how the use of credit information may affect the availability and affordability of property/casualty insurance, whether the use of certain factors by credit scoring systems could have a disparate impact on minorities and, if so, whether the computer models used could be modified to produce
comparable results with less negative impact. The study is expected to be finalized sometime 2010.
In a similar study, the FTC found that auto insurers’ use of insurance credit
scores leads to more accurate underwriting of auto insurance policies in that
there is a correlation between insurance scores and the likelihood of filing an
insurance claim. The FTC report, Credit-Based Insurance Scores: Impacts on
Consumers of Automobile Insurance, released in July 2007, also states that
credit scores cannot easily be used as a proxy for race and ethnic origin. In other
words, credit scoring predicted risk for members of minority groups in much the
same way that it predicted risk for members of nonminority groups.
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 directed the FTC to
address the issue of whether the use of credit had a disparate impact on the
availability and affordability of insurance for minorities. Based on a poll of consumers, the General Accountability Office has recommended that the Treasury
and FTC take steps to improve consumers’ understanding of credit scoring and
how credit histories are used, targeting in particular those with less education
and less experience in obtaining credit.
The Federal Reserve also studied the use of credit scoring. Although looking
at credit scoring to quantify risk posed by a borrower rather than an applicant
for insurance or a policyholder, the Federal Reserve said in a report issued at the
end of August 2007 that credit scores were predictive of credit risk and were not
proxies or substitutes for race ethnicity or gender, underscoring the FTC study.
Insurance Scores: Insurance scores are confidential rankings based on credit
history information. They are a measure of how a person manages his or her
financial affairs. People who manage their finances well tend to also manage
other important aspects of their lives responsibly, such as driving a car. Combined with factors such as geographical area, previous crashes, age and gender,
insurance scores enable auto insurers to price more accurately, so that people
less likely to file a claim pay less for their insurance than people who are more
likely to file a claim. For homeowners insurance, insurers use other factors combined with credit such as the home’s construction, location and proximity to
water supplies for fighting fires.
Insurance scores predict the average claim behavior of a group of people
with essentially the same credit history. A good score is typically above 760 and
40

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Auto
Credit
Insurance
Scoring

a bad score is below 600. People with low insurance scores tend to file more
claims. But there are exceptions. Within that group, there may be individuals
who have stellar driving records and have never filed a claim just as there are
teenager drivers who have never had a crash although teenagers as a group have
more accidents than people in other age groups.
Credit Report Information—Who Wants It? It is becoming increasingly

important to have an acceptable credit record. Whether we like it or not, society
equates the ability to manage credit responsibly with responsible behavior, even
if individuals have a bad credit record through no fault of their own. Landlords
often look at applicants’ credit records before renting apartments to see whether
they manage their finances responsibly and are therefore likely to pay their rent
on time. Banks and other lenders look at the credit records of loan applicants to
find out whether they are likely to have loans repaid. Some employers also look
at credit records, especially where employees handle money, and view a good
credit record as a measure of maturity and stability.
In some insurance companies, underwriters have long used credit records
in cases where additional information was needed. Before the development of
automated scoring systems, underwriters would look at the data and make decisions, often erring on the overly cautious side that disadvantaged many more
people. Automated insurance scoring and underwriting systems eliminate the
weaknesses inherent in someone’s personal judgment and have allowed more
drivers to be placed in preferred and standard rating classifications, saving them
money. With the development of these scoring models, the use of credit-related
information in underwriting and rating for many insurers has become routine.
Insurers use insurance scores to different extents and in different ways. Most use
them to screen new applicants for insurance and price new business.
Why Insurers Need It: Insurers need to be able to assess the risk of loss—the

possibility that a driver or a homeowner will have an accident and file a claim—
in order to decide whether to insure that individual and what rate to set for the
coverage provided. The more accurate the information, the closer the insurance
company can come to making appropriate decisions. Where information is
insufficient, applicants for insurance may be placed in the wrong risk classification. That means that some good drivers will pay more than they should for
coverage and some bad drivers will pay less than they should. The insurance
company will probably collect enough premiums between the two groups to
pay claims and expenses, but the good drivers will be subsidizing the bad.
By law in every state, insurers are prohibited from setting rates that unfairly
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	41

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Credit
Auto Insurance
Scoring

discriminate against any individual. But the underwriting and rating processes
are geared specifically to differentiate good risks from bad risks. Since insurance
is a business, insurers favor those applicants that are least likely to suffer a loss.
One of the key competitive aspects of the personal lines insurance business is
the ability to segment risks and price policies accurately according to the likely
cost of claims generated by those policies. Insurance scores help insurers accomplish these objectives.

42

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Earthquakes: Risk and Insurance
Auto Insurance
Issues

Earthquakes: Risk and Insurance Issues
An earthquake is a sudden and rapid shaking of the earth caused by the breaking and shifting of rock beneath the earth’s surface. This shaking can sometimes
trigger landslides, avalanches, flash floods, fires and tsunamis. Unlike other natural disasters such as hurricanes, there are no specific seasons for earthquakes.
Earthquakes in the United States are not covered under standard homeowners or business insurance policies. Coverage is usually available for earthquake
damage in the form of an endorsement to a home or business insurance policy.
However, insurers that do not sell earthquake insurance may still be impacted
by these catastrophes due to losses from fire following a quake. These losses
could involve claims for business interruption and additional living expenses as
well. Cars and other vehicles are covered for earthquake damage under the comprehensive part of the auto insurance policy.
In the United States about 5,000 quakes strike each year. Since 1900, earthquakes have occurred in 39 states and caused damage in all 50. One of the worst
catastrophes in U.S. history, the San Francisco Earthquake of 1906, would have
caused insured losses of $96 billion, were the quake to hit under current economic and demographic conditions, according to AIR Worldwide.
The potential cost of earthquakes has been growing because of increasing urban
development in seismically active areas and the vulnerability of older buildings,
which may not have been built or upgraded to current building codes.
The Northridge earthquake, which struck Southern California on January
17, 1994, was the most costly quake in U.S. history, causing an estimated $20
billion in total property damage, including $12.5 billion in insured losses. In its
wake the California Earthquake Authority (CEA) was created in 1996. Fearing
insolvency from another massive earthquake, the vast majority of insurers in
the state’s homeowners insurance market had severely restricted or ceased writing coverage altogether after Northridge. To ensure the availability of homeowners coverage and end a serious threat to the vitality of the state’s housing market, the California Legislature established the CEA as a publicly managed, largely
privately funded entity.
Only about 12 percent of Californians now purchase earthquake coverage,
down from about 30 percent in 1996 when the devastating 1994 Northridge
quake was still fresh in people’s minds. To encourage more Californians to buy
the coverage, the CEA, approved an average 22 percent rate cut, which went
into effect July 1, 2006. The CEA says that a sharp drop in the cost of reinsurance and several years without a major quake, allowing the buildup reserves,
made the cut possible.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	43

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Earthquakes:
Auto Insurance
Risk and Insurance Issues

Losses from Major Recent Earthquakes: At the beginning of 2010 there were

two major earthquakes: a 7.0 magnitude quake in Haiti in January and a 8.8
magnitude quake in Chile in February. The Haiti quake killed over 220,000 people and caused $8 billion dollars in damages, most of it uninsured. The Chile
quake, though more powerful, was far less deadly as its epicenter was located in
a region with relatively low population density and because Chile’s history of
damaging quakes has led to strict building codes. The Chile quake and its associated tsunami caused over $4 billion in insured losses and more than $20 billion
in total damages (including insured and uninsured losses), according to Munich
Re. It caused about 500 deaths.

44

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Financial and Market
AutoConditions
Insurance

Financial and Market Conditions
Many forces affect the price, availability and security of the insurance product.
Some are external, such as the state of the economy, changes in interest rates
and the stock market, regulatory activity, the number and severity of natural
disasters, growth in litigation and rising medical costs. Others are internal, such
as the level of competition.
Fortunately, insurance companies run their businesses conservatively, as
if every day might bring some new disaster, so despite current economic and
financial conditions, the industry has been able to function normally. Unlike
banks, insurers are not highly leveraged (they generally do not borrow to make
investments or to pay claims); they limit the amount of risk they assume to the
capital they have on hand; and because they do not sell the risks they assume to
another party—they have some “skin in the game”—they must underwrite carefully or suffer the consequences.
The insurance industry is cyclical. Rates and profits fluctuate depending on
the phase of the cycle, particularly in commercial coverages. The profitability
cycle may be somewhat different for different types of insurance.
The cycle of the early and mid-1980s was among the most severe that the
industry has experienced. That cycle centered on liability insurance. The most
recent hard market began early in about 2001 and peaked in early 2004. The
industry has been experiencing a soft market due to the poor economy. While
there had been some indication that rates were flattening out, industry analysts
expect to soft market to continue well into 2010.
The Insurance Cycle: The property/casualty insurance industry has exhibited
cyclical behavior for many years, as far back as the 1920s. These cycles are characterized by periods of rising rates leading to increased profitability. Following
a period of solid but not spectacular rates of return, the industry enters a down
phase where prices soften, supply of insurance becomes plentiful and, eventually, profitability diminishes or vanishes completely. In the cycle’s down phase,
as results deteriorate, the basic ability of insurance companies to underwrite
new business or, for some companies even to renew some existing policies, can
be impaired because the capital needed to support the underwriting of risk has
been depleted through losses. Cycles vary in their severity.
The insurance industry cycle is not unlike the cycle that occurs in agriculture, for example, in the wheat and beef markets. Demand for the product
in both industries is relatively stable and is relatively unresponsive to price
changes, while supply can vary from year to year. This means that when supply
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	45

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Financial
Auto Insurance
and Market Conditions

increases, lowering the price will not instantly “clear” the market of excess supply. If the price of auto insurance is cut in half, people will still buy only one
policy, although they may increase the amount of coverage they purchase.
In the 1950s and 1960s cycles were regular, with a three-year period of soft
pricing followed by a three-year period of hard pricing in practically all lines
of property/casualty insurance. In the 1970s and 1980s, there were only two
cycles, one mainly affecting auto insurance in the mid-1970s and the other in
the mid-1980s, affecting commercial liability insurance. The commercial liability insurance cycle gave rise to the “liability crisis,” when certain types of commercial liability coverages, such as insurance for daycare centers, municipalities,
ski resorts and any establishment selling liquor, became difficult to obtain. Since
that time, with the exception of the difficulty in obtaining medical malpractice
insurance in the early part of the last decade, the insurance cycle has had less of
an impact on the public.

46

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Flood
Auto Insurance

Flood Insurance
Because of frequent flooding of the Mississippi River during the 1960s and the
rising cost of taxpayer funded disaster relief for flood victims, in 1968 Congress
created the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). It has three mandates:
to provide residential and commercial insurance coverage for flood damage, to
improve floodplain management and to develop maps of flood hazard zones.
While the comprehensive section of an auto insurance policy covers flood
damage to vehicles, there is no coverage for flooding in standard homeowners,
renters or commercial property insurance policies. It is available in a separate
policy from the NFIP and from a few private insurers. Despite efforts to publicize this, many people exposed to the risk of floods still fail to purchase flood
insurance.
It was the widespread flooding associated with Hurricane Katrina in 2005
that drew attention to the NFIP and set in motion debate about how to improve
it. So far, Congress has not taken steps to significantly revamp the program.
Federal flood insurance is only available where local governments have
adopted adequate flood plain management regulations for their floodplain areas
as set out by NFIP. About 20,400 communities across the country participate in
the program. NFIP coverage is also available outside of the high-hazard areas.
The NFIP law was amended in 1969 to provide coverage for mudslides and
again in 1973. Until then, the purchase of flood insurance had been voluntary,
with only about one million policies in force. The 1973 amendment put constraints on the use of federal funds in high-risk floodplains, a measure that was
expected to lead to almost universal flood coverage in these zones. The law prohibits lenders that are federally regulated, supervised or insured by federal agencies from lending money on a property in a floodplain zone when a community
is participating in the NFIP, unless the property is covered by flood insurance.
Legislation was enacted in 1994 to tighten enforcement of flood insurance
requirements. Regulators can now fine banks with a pattern of failure to enforce
the law and lenders can purchase flood insurance on behalf of homeowners
who fail to buy it themselves, then bill them for coverage. The law includes a
provision that denies federal disaster aid to people who have been flooded twice
and have failed to purchase insurance after the first flood.
Buildings constructed in a floodplain after a community has met regulations must conform to elevation requirements. When repair, reconstruction or
improvement to an older building equals or exceeds 50 percent of its market
value, the structure must be updated to conform to current building codes.
A 2007 NFIP study on the benefits of elevating buildings showed that due to
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

	47

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Flood
Auto Insurance
Insurance

significantly lower premiums homeowners can usually recover the higher construction costs in less than five years for homes built in a “velocity” zone, where
the structure is likely to be subject to wave damage, and in five to 15 years in a
standard flood zone. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) estimates that buildings constructed to NFIP standards suffer about 80 percent less
damage annually that those not built in compliance.
How It Works: The NFIP is administered by FEMA, now part of the Department of Homeland Security. Flood insurance was initially only available
through insurance agents who dealt directly with the federal program. The
“direct” policy program has been supplemented since 1983 with a private/public
cooperative arrangement, known as “Write Your Own,” through which a pool
of insurance companies issue policies and adjust flood claims on behalf of the
federal government under their own names, charging the same premium as the
direct program. Participating insurers receive an expense allowance for policies
written and claims processed. The federal government retains responsibility for
underwriting losses. Today, most policies are issued through the Write-YourOwn program but some nonfederally backed coverage is available from the private market.
The NFIP is expected to be self-supporting (i.e., premiums are set at an
actuarially sound level) in an average loss year, as reflected in past experience.
In an extraordinary year, as Hurricane Katrina demonstrated, losses can greatly
exceed premiums, leaving the NFIP with a huge debt to the U.S. Treasury that it
is unlikely to be able to pay back. Hurricane Katrina losses and the percentage of
flood damage that was uninsured led to calls for a revamping of the entire flood
program.
As with other types of insurance, rates for flood insurance are based on the
degree of risk. FEMA assesses flood risk for all the participating communities,
resulting in the publication of thousands of individual flood rate maps. Highrisk areas are known as Special Flood Hazard Areas, or SFHAs.
Flood plain maps are redrawn periodically, removing some properties previously designated as high hazard and adding new ones. New technology enables
flood mitigation programs to more accurately pinpoint areas vulnerable to
flooding. As development in and around flood plains increases, run off patterns
can change, causing flooding in areas that were formerly not considered high
risk and vice versa.
People tend to underestimate the risk of flooding. The highest-risk areas
(Zone A) have an annual flood risk of 1 percent and a 26 percent chance of
flooding over the lifetime of a 30-year mortgage, compared with a 9 percent risk
48

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Flood
Auto Insurance

of fire over the same period. In addition, people who live in areas adjacent to
high-risk zones may still be exposed to floods on occasion. Ninety percent of all
natural disasters in this country involve flooding, the NFIP says. Since the inception of the federal program, some 25 to 30 percent of all paid losses were for
damage in areas not officially designated at the time of loss as special flood hazard areas. NFIP coverage is available outside high-risk zones at a lower premium.
To prevent people putting off the purchase of coverage until waters are
rising and flooding is inevitable, policyholders must wait 30 days before their
policy takes effect. In 1993, 7,800 policies purchased at the last minute resulted
in $48 million in claims against only $625,000 in premiums.
Proposals for Change: The NFIP has four major goals: to decrease the risk of
flood losses; reduce the costs and consequences of flooding; reduce the demand
for federal assistance; and preserve and restore beneficial floodplain functions.
In a final report published in 2006 by the American Institutes for Research
(AIR), which conducted an evaluation of the federal flood insurance program,
AIR said that although much had been accomplished, the program fell short
of meeting its goals in part because the NFIP did not have the ability to guide
development away from floodplains and cannot restore beneficial floodplain
functions once they have been impaired. In addition, AIR said, many people
still are not covered or not adequately covered for flood damage. AIR also noted
that the NFIP was hampered in reaching its goals by insufficient Congressional
funding, lack of pertinent data, misperceptions about the nature of the program
and the breakdown in coordination among its three major sectors.
A report published by FEMA in 2007 suggests that development patterns
should be changed to protect environmentally sensitive areas and that communities in the flood program should be encouraged or required to ban development in these locations.
Another criticism of the NFIP is that it does not charge enough for coverage. Among the reasons for the premium shortfall is that the cost of coverage
on dwellings that were built before floodplain management regulations were
established in their communities is subsidized. As a result, the premiums paid
for flood coverage by the owners of these properties reflect only 30 to 40 percent of the true risk of loss. In January 2006 FEMA estimated an annual shortfall
in premium income of $750 million due to these subsidies. Some subsidized
properties also suffer repetitive losses. Repetitive loss properties accounted for
about $4.6 billion in claims payments between 1978 and 2004. The AIR report
acknowledged that the current system is not eliminating existing damage-prone
buildings as quickly as expected.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	49

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance
Auto Insurance
Fraud

Insurance Fraud
The Insurance Information Institute estimates that fraud accounts for 10 percent
of the property/casualty insurance industry’s incurred losses and loss adjustment
expenses, or about $30 billion a year. This fraud results in higher premiums.
Fraud may be committed at different points in the insurance transaction by
different parties: applicants for insurance, policyholders, third-party claimants
and professionals who provide services to claimants. Common frauds include
“padding,” or inflating actual claims; misrepresenting facts on an insurance
application; submitting claims for injuries or damage that never occurred; and
“staging” accidents.
Prompted by the incidence of insurance fraud, 41 states and the District of
Columbia have set up fraud bureaus (some bureaus have limited powers, and
some states have more than one bureau to address fraud in different lines of
insurance). These agencies have reported increases in referrals (tips about suspected fraud), cases opened, convictions and court-ordered restitution.
Insurance fraud can be “hard” or “soft.” Hard fraud occurs when someone
deliberately fabricates claims or fakes an accident. Soft insurance fraud, also known
as opportunistic fraud, occurs when people pad legitimate claims, for example, or,
in the case of business owners, list fewer employees or misrepresent the work they
do to pay lower workers compensation premiums.
People who commit insurance fraud range from organized criminals, who
steal large sums through fraudulent business activities and insurance claim
mills, to professionals and technicians, who inflate the cost of services or charge
for services not rendered, to ordinary people who want to cover their deductible
or view filing a claim as an opportunity to make a little money.
Some lines of insurance are more vulnerable to fraud than others.
Healthcare, workers compensation and auto insurance are believed to be the
sectors most affected.
Insurance fraud received little attention until the 1980s when the rising
price of insurance and the growth in organized fraud spurred efforts to pass
stronger antifraud laws. Allied with insurers were parties affected by fraud—
consumers who pay higher insurance premiums to compensate for losses from
fraud; direct victims of organized fraud groups; and chiropractors and other
medical professionals who are concerned that their reputations will be tarnished.
One out of five Americans think it is acceptable to defraud insurance companies under certain conditions, according to the Coalition Against Insurance
Fraud. The organization released the findings in a 2008 study, “The Four Faces
50

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Insurance
Auto Insurance
Fraud

of Insurance Fraud.” It found that the public is consistently more tolerant of
specific insurance frauds today than it was 10 years before.
In addition, studies by the Insurance Research Council show that significant
numbers of Americans think it is all right to inflate their insurance claims to
make up for insurance premiums they have paid in previous years when they
have had no claims or to pad a claim to make up for the deductible they would
have to pay.
Insurers must preserve the fine line between investigating suspicious claims
and harassing legitimate claimants and the need to comply with the time
requirements for paying claims imposed by fair claim practice regulations. All
states have unfair claim settlement practice laws on their books to ensure that
the parties involved are informed of the progress of investigations and that
investigators settle the claim promptly or within a specified amount of time.
About 19 states have provisions that provide guidance and protection for investigators by allowing time limit extensions or waivers and detailing what evidence is required and to whom the evidence should be made available.
Insurers’ Antifraud Measures: The legal options of an insurance company
that suspects fraud are limited. The insurer can only inform law enforcement
agencies of suspicious claims, withhold payment and collect evidence for use
in a court. The success of the battle against insurance fraud therefore depends
on two elements: the level of priority assigned by legislators, regulators, law
enforcement agencies and society as a whole to the problem and the resources
devoted by the insurance industry itself. To that end most insurers have established special investigation units (SIUs). These entities help identify and investigate suspicious claims.
Insurers have also created a national fraud academy. A joint initiative of the
Property Casualty Insurers Association of America, the FBI, National Insurance
Crime Bureau (NICB) and the International Association of Special Investigating
Units, it is designed to fight insurance claims fraud by educating and training
fraud investigators. It offers online classes under the leadership of the NICB.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	51

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

The
AutoLiability
Insurance
System and Medical Malpractice

The Liability System and
Medical Malpractice Insurance Issues
Litigiousness has become a societal problem in the United States. The tort system cost $254.7 billion in 2008 in direct costs, which translates into $838 per
person, and many billions of dollars more in indirect costs, according to Towers
Perrin’s most recent tort costs study. U.S. consumers pay directly for the high
cost of going to court through higher liability insurance premiums because liability insurance rates reflect what insurance companies pay out for their policyholders’ legal defense and any judgments against them. And they pay indirectly
in higher prices for goods and services since businesses pass on to consumers
the expenses they incur in protecting themselves against lawsuits, including the
cost of commercial liability insurance.
Beginning in the 1980s, in an effort to reduce litigation costs, business
groups and others mounted a campaign to reform tort law. Tort law is the basis
for the U.S. liability system. Most reforms have taken place on the state level
and during the last decade all but a handful of states passed significant tort law
reforms. However, some have been overturned by the courts.
Many reform efforts have focused on medical malpractice issues. Medical
malpractice insurance covers doctors and other professionals in the medical
field for liability claims arising from their treatment of patients.
The cost of medical malpractice insurance began to rise in the early 2000s
after a period of essentially flat prices. Rate increases were precipitated in part by
the growing size of claims, particularly in urban areas. Among the other factors
driving up prices was a reduced supply of available coverage as several major
insurers exited the medical malpractice business because of the difficulty of
making a profit.
New research suggests that premium increases may be moderating but, for
any significant turnaround to take root, major reforms in the delivery of medical care that focus on patient safety need to occur, industry observers say.
State Tort Reform Issues
Caps in Noneconomic Damages: According to the National Conference of
State Legislatures, 30 states, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico limit jury awards
in malpractice cases. In the past few years, a number court have ruled against
such limits. In Georgia, the Supreme Court ruled that a 2005 state law that limited jury awards for pain and suffering in malpractice cases to $350,000 improperly interfered with a jury’s duty to determine damages in a civil lawsuit. In the
decision Chief Justice Carol Hunstein said that limits in any amount violate the
52

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates 	

Insurance Topics
The Liability System and Medical
Auto
Malpractice
Insurance

right to trial by jury. In Illinois, the Supreme Court overturned the state’s 2005
medical malpractice statute, which capped noneconomic (pain and suffering)
medical malpractice awards at $500,000 in lawsuits against physicians and $1
million for hospitals. The court ruled that the law violated the state’s constitutional principle of separation of powers in that lawmakers had made decisions
that should be made by judges and juries.
Some states, such as Maryland, are deciding to retain their caps when challenged.
Arbitration: To keep small disputes out of the courts, insurers are increasingly
turning to arbitration. The nation’s largest arbitration provider, nonprofit Arbitration Forums, resolved more than 520,000 inter-insurance disputes in 2009
valued at $2.5 billion, for a savings in litigation costs of $700 million. Disputes
leading to arbitration typically arise when insurance or self-insured companies
believe their policyholders or employees are not at fault or due to disagreement
over the percentage of liability or the amount of damages. More than 85 percent
of these disputes involve auto collisions.
Tort Liability Environment: In December 2009 the American Tort Reform
Association (ATRA) released its annual list of states and counties characterized
as “Judicial Hellholes,” places with courts that have a disproportionately harmful impact on civil litigation. ATRA explains that personal injury lawyers seek
out these places as targets for their efforts to expand liability and develop new
opportunities for litigation. ATRA’s newest list includes six Judicial Hellholes,
including holdovers South Florida; West Virginia; Cook County, Illinois; and
Atlantic County, New Jersey, and New Mexico appellate courts and New York
City, which are new on the list. ATRA highlights several reforms that can help
restore balance to these jurisdictions. They include stopping venue shopping
(looking for jurisdictions where juries are favorable to plaintiffs), imposing
sanctions for bringing frivolous lawsuits, stemming abuse of consumer laws,
ensuring that noneconomic damage awards serve a compensatory purpose, and
strengthening rules to promote sound science in the courtroom.

	

I.I.I. Insurance Handbook   www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

53

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Microinsurance
Auto Insurance

Microinsurance
A growing number of insurers are tapping into markets in developing countries
through microinsurance projects, which provide low-cost insurance to individuals generally not covered by traditional insurance or government programs.
Microinsurance products tend to be much less costly than traditional products
and thus extend protection to a much wider market. The approach is an outgrowth of the microfinancing projects developed by Bangladeshi Nobel Prizewinning banker and economist Muhammad Yunus, which helped millions of
low-income individuals in Asia and Africa to set up businesses and buy houses.
American International Group Inc. (AIG) was one of the first companies to offer
microinsurance and began selling policies in Uganda in 1997. Swiss Re, Munich
Re, Allianz and Zurich Financial Services have also entered the microinsurance
arena. Disasters such as the 2005 tsunami in Indonesia and the 2010 Haiti earthquake have demonstrated the need for insurance in many regions, prompting
insurers to develop new products. While the coverage is often geared to protection from natural disasters, there are also programs covering life/health risks as
well.
With limited growth prospects in the insurance markets of developed
countries, which are largely saturated, insurers see microinsurance in emerging
economies as presenting significant potential for growth and profitability. A
2009 Swiss Re report on world insurance markets found that premium growth in
emerging markets far outpaced growth in industrialized countries in 2008. The
study identified the following regions as “emerging markets”: Latin America,
Central and Eastern Europe, South and East Asia, the Middle East (excluding
Israel) and Central Asia, Turkey and Africa.
In 2009 the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the World
Bank, the International Labor Organization and other multilateral groups
launched a program to improve access to insurance in emerging and underserved markets called the “Access to Insurance Initiative.” Also in 2009 representatives from over 60 countries participated in the Fifth International
Microinsurance Conference, which was organized by the reinsurer Munich Re
and the Microinsurance Network, a joint effort of aid organizations, multilateral
agencies, insurers, policymakers and academics.

54

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics

No-Fault Auto Insurance and Other Auto Liability
Auto Insurance
Systems

No-Fault Auto Insurance and Other Auto
Liability Systems
State auto liability insurance laws fall into four broad categories: no-fault, choice
no-fault, tort liability and add-on. The major differences are whether there are
restrictions on the right to sue and whether the policyholder’s own insurer pays
first-party benefits, up to the state maximum amount, regardless of who is at
fault in the accident. These alternative systems have evolved over time as consumers, regulators and insurers have sought ways to lower the cost and speed up
the delivery of compensation for auto accidents.
The term “no-fault” auto insurance is often used loosely to denote any auto
insurance program that allows policyholders to recover financial losses from
their own insurance company, regardless of fault. But in its strictest form nofault applies only to state laws that both provide for the payment of no-fault
first-party benefits and restrict the right to sue, the so-called “limited tort”
option. The first-party (policyholder) benefit coverage is known as personal
injury protection (PIP).
Under current no-fault laws, motorists may sue for severe injuries and for
pain and suffering only if the case meets certain conditions. These conditions,
known as a threshold, relate to the severity of injury. They may be expressed in
verbal terms (a descriptive or verbal threshold) or in dollar amounts of medical
bills, a monetary threshold. Some laws also include minimum requirements for
the days of disability incurred as a result of the accident. Because high threshold
no-fault systems restrict litigation, they tend to reduce costs and delays in paying claims. Verbal thresholds eliminate the incentive to inflate claims that may
exist when there is a dollar “target” for medical expenses. However, in some
states the verbal threshold has been eroded over time by broad judicial interpretation of the verbal threshold language, and PIP coverage has become the target
of abuse and fraud by dishonest doctors and clinics that bill for unnecessary and
expensive medical procedures, pushing up costs.
Currently 12 states and Puerto Rico have no-fault auto insurance laws.
Florida, Michigan, New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania have verbal
thresholds. The other seven states—Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, North Dakota and Utah—use a monetary threshold. Three states
have a “choice” no-fault law. In New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Kentucky, motorists may reject the lawsuit threshold and retain the right to sue for any autorelated injury.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	55

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

No-Fault
Auto Insurance
Auto Insurance and Other Auto Liability Systems

The Different Auto Insurance Systems
No-fault: The no-fault system is intended to lower the cost of auto insurance
by taking small claims out of the courts. Each insurance company compensates
its own policyholders (the first party) for the cost of minor injuries, regardless
of who was at fault in the accident. (The second party is the insurance company
and the third is the other party or parties hurt as a result of the accident.)
These first-party benefits, known as personal injury protection (PIP), are
a mandatory coverage in true no-fault states. The extent of coverage varies by
state. In states with the most comprehensive benefits, a policyholder receives
compensation for medical fees, lost wages, funeral costs and other out-of-pocket
expenses. The major variations involve dollar limits on medical and hospital
expenses, funeral and burial expenses, lost income and the amount to be paid a
person hired to perform essential services that an injured non-income producer
is unable to perform.
Drivers in no-fault states may sue for severe injuries if the case meets certain
conditions. These conditions are known as the tort liability threshold and may
be expressed in verbal terms such as death or significant disfigurement (verbal
threshold) or in dollar amounts of medical bills (monetary threshold).
Choice no-fault: In choice no-fault states, drivers may select one of two
options: a no-fault auto insurance policy or a traditional tort liability policy. In
New Jersey and Pennsylvania the no-fault option has a verbal threshold. In Kentucky there is a monetary threshold.
Tort liability: In traditional tort liability states, there are no restrictions on
lawsuits. A policyholder at fault in a car crash can be sued by the other driver
and by the other driver’s passengers for the pain and suffering the accident
caused as well as for out-of-pocket expenses such as medical costs.
Add-on: In add-on states, drivers receive compensation from their own insurance company as they do in no-fault states, but there are no restrictions on
lawsuits. The term “add-on” is used because in these states first-party benefits
have been added on to the traditional tort liability system. In add-on states,
first-party coverage may not be mandatory and the benefits may be lower than
in true no-fault states.

56

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
AutoRegulation
Insurance

Regulation
Insurance is regulated by the individual states. The move to modernize insurance regulation is being driven in part by the globalization of insurance services.
Some large U.S. companies that operate in other countries support the concept
of a federal system that provides one-stop regulatory approval while others
believe the merits of a state system outweigh the virtues of a single national
regulator. As a result of discussions about the merits of each system, states are
making it easier for insurers to respond quickly to market forces. States monitor
insurance company solvency. One important function related to this is overseeing rate changes. Rate making is the process of calculating a price to cover the
future cost of insurance claims and expenses, including a margin for profit. To
establish rates, insurers look at past trends and changes in the current environment that may affect potential losses in the future. Rates are not the same as
premiums. A rate is the price of a given unit of insurance—$2.50 per $1,000
of earthquake coverage, for example. The premium represents the total cost of
many units. If the price to rebuild a house is $150,000, the premium would be
150 x $2.50. Rates vary according to the likelihood and potential size of loss.
Using the example of earthquake insurance, rates would be higher near a fault
line and for a brick house, which is more susceptible to damage, than a frame
one.
While the regulatory processes in each state vary, three principles guide
every state’s rate regulation system: that rates be adequate (to maintain insurance company solvency), but not excessive (not so high as to lead to exorbitant
profits), nor unfairly discriminatory (price differences must reflect expected
claim and expense differences). Recently, in auto and home insurance, the
twin issues of availability and affordability, which are not explicitly included
in the guiding principles, have been assuming greater importance in regulatory
decisions.
In line with these principles, states have adopted various methods of regulating insurance rates, which fall roughly into two categories: “prior approval”
and “competitive.” This does not mean there is no competition in states using a
prior approval system. Most approved rates in prior approval states are the rates
used, but in some cases, particularly in commercial coverages, companies compete at rates below these approved ceilings.
Regulation Modernization
Increasingly, even in the most regulated states, officials are relying on competition among insurance companies to keep rates down and are modernizing and
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	57

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Regulation
Auto Insurance

streamlining the rate setting process.
The move to modernize insurance regulation is being driven in part by the
globalization of insurance services. Some large U.S. companies that operate in
other countries support the concept of a federal system that provides one-stop
regulatory approval while others believe the merits of a state system outweigh
the virtues of a single national regulator. As a result of discussions about the
merits of each system, states are making it easier for insurers to respond quickly
to market forces. Since 2009, various pieces of legislation have been introduced
in Congress that respond to a number of concerns: lack of an entity at the federal level that can represent insurance interests, particularly in the discussion
of international issues; the need for better oversight of systemic risk—the interconnectedness of the risk assumed by a few large financial services companies
whose failure could bring down the entire financial system; and the need to
streamline the regulation of reinsurers and surplus lines insurers.
For example, in Georgia, a law was signed in May 2008 that allows auto
insurance companies to adjust most rates without the prior approval of the
insurance commissioner. Georgia joins at least 30 other states that let rates more
closely reflect competition in the marketplace
Type of State Rating Laws
Prior Approval: The insurer must file rates, rules, etc. with state regulators.
Depending on the statute, the filing becomes effective when a specified waiting
period elapses (if the state regulator does not take specific action on the filing, it
is deemed approved automatically) or the state regulator formally approves the
filing. A state regulator may disapprove a filing at any time if it is not in compliance with the law. The state regulator normally must hold a hearing to establish
noncompliance.
Modified Prior Approval: This is a hybrid of “prior approval” and “file and
use” laws. If the rate revision is based solely on a change in loss experience then
“file and use” may apply. However, if the rate revision is based on a change in
expense relationships or rate classifications, then “prior approval” may apply.
A state regulator may disapprove a filing at any time if it is not in compliance
with the law. The state regulator normally must hold a hearing to establish noncompliance.
Flex Rating: The insurer may increase or decrease a rate within a “flex band,”
or range, without approval of the state regulator. Generally, either “file and use”
or “use and file” provisions apply. Generally, the insurer must file rate increases
58

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
AutoRegulation
Insurance

or decreases that fall outside the established “flex band” with the state regulator for approval. Typically, “prior approval” provisions apply. The “flex band” is
set either by statute or by the state regulator. A state regulator may disapprove
a filing at any time if it is not in compliance with the law. The state regulator
normally must hold a hearing to establish noncompliance.
File and Use: The insurer must file rates, rules, etc. with the state regulator.
The filing becomes effective immediately or on a future date specified by the
filer. A state regulator may disapprove a filing at any time if it is not in compliance with the law. The state regulator normally must hold a hearing to establish
noncompliance.
Use and File: The filing becomes effective when used. The insurer must file
rates, rules, etc. with the state regulator within a specified time period after first
use. A state regulator may disapprove a filing at any time if it is not in compliance with the law. The state regulator normally must hold a hearing to establish
noncompliance.
State-Prescribed: The state regulator determines and promulgates the rates,
classifications, forms, etc. to which all insurers must adhere. Insurers are usually
permitted to deviate from state prescribed rates, classifications, forms, etc., with
the approval of the state regulator.
No File/Record Maintenance: The insurer need not file rates, rules, etc. with
the state regulator. Rates, rules, etc. become effective when used. The state regulator may periodically examine insurer(s) to ensure compliance with the law.
Generally, there are record maintenance requirements, under which insurers
must make their rating systems available to the state regulator for examination.
A state regulator may order discontinuance of the use of the material at any
time if it is not in compliance with the law. The state regulator normally must
hold a hearing to establish noncompliance.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	59

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Reinsurance
Auto Insurance

Reinsurance
Reinsurance is insurance for insurance companies. It is a way of transferring
or “ceding” some of the financial risk insurance companies assume in insuring cars, homes and businesses to another insurance company, the reinsurer.
Reinsurance, a highly complex global business, accounted for about 9 percent of
the U.S. property/casualty insurance industry premiums in 2008, according to
the Reinsurance Association of America.
The reinsurance business is evolving. Traditionally, reinsurance transactions
were between two insurance entities: the primary insurer that sold the original
insurance policies and the reinsurer. Most still are. Primary insurers and reinsurers can share both the premiums and losses or reinsurers may assume the primary company’s losses above a certain dollar limit in return for a fee. However,
risks of various kinds, particularly of natural disasters, are now being sold by
insurers and reinsurers to institutional investors in the form of catastrophe
bonds and other alternative risk-spreading mechanisms. Increasingly, new products reflect a gradual blending of reinsurance and investment banking.
After Hurricane Andrew hit Southern Florida in 1992, causing $15.5 billion
in insured losses at the time, it became clear that U.S. insurers had seriously
underestimated the extent of their liability for property losses in a megadisaster. Until Hurricane Andrew, the industry had thought $8 billion was the largest possible catastrophe loss. Reinsurers subsequently reassessed their position,
which in turn caused primary companies to reconsider their catastrophe reinsurance needs.
The shortage and high cost of traditional catastrophe reinsurance precipitated by Hurricane Andrew and declining interest rates, which sent investors
looking for higher yields, prompted interest in securitization of insurance risk.
Among the precursors to catastrophe bonds and other forms of securitization were contingency financing bonds such as those issued for the Florida
Windstorm Association in 1996, which provided cash in the event of a catastrophe but had to be repaid after a loss, and contingent surplus notes—an agreement with a bank or other lender that in the event of a megadisaster that would
significantly reduce policyholders’ surplus, funds would be made available at a
predetermined price. Funds to pay for the transaction should money be needed,
are held in U.S. Treasuries. Surplus notes are not considered debt, therefore do
not hamper an insurer’s ability to write additional insurance. In addition, there
were equity puts, through which an insurer would receive a sum of money in
the event of a catastrophic loss in exchange for stock or other options.
A catastrophe bond is a specialized security, introduced in 1997, that
60

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Auto
Reinsurance
Insurance

increases insurers’ ability to provide insurance protection by transferring the
risk to bond investors. Commercial banks and other lenders have been securitizing mortgages for years, freeing up capital to expand their mortgage business.
Insurers and reinsurers issue catastrophe bonds to the securities market through
an issuer known as a special purpose reinsurance vehicle (SPRV) set up specifically for this purpose. These bonds have complicated structures and are typically
created offshore where tax and regulatory treatment may be more favorable.
SPRVs collect the premium from the insurance or reinsurance company and the
principal from investors and hold them in a trust in the form of U.S. Treasuries
or other highly rated assets, using the investment income to pay interest on
the principal. Catastrophe bonds pay high interest rates but if the trigger event
occurs, investors lose the interest and sometimes the principal, depending on
the structure of the bond, both of which may be used to cover the insurer’s
disaster losses. Bonds may be issued for a one-year term or multiple years, often
three.
The field has gradually evolved to the point where some investors and
insurance company issuers are beginning to feel comfortable with the concept,
with some coming back to the capital markets each year. In addition to the high
interest rates catastrophe bonds pay, their attraction to investors is that they
diversify investment portfolio risk, thus reducing the volatility of returns. The
returns on most other securities are tied to economic activity rather than natural disasters. Catastrophe bonds have evolved into a multibillion dollar industry.
Though pioneered by reinsurers, primary insurers now frequently sponsor new
issues.
In addition to catastrophe bonds, catastrophe options were developed but
the market for these options never took off. Another alternative is the exchange
of risk where individual companies in different parts of the world swap a certain
amount of losses. Payment is triggered by the occurrence of an agreed upon
event at a certain level of magnitude.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	61

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

Residual Markets
In a normal competitive market, insurers are free to select from among people
applying for insurance those drivers, property owners and commercial operations they wish to insure. They do this by evaluating the risks involved through
a process called underwriting.
Applicants who are considered “high risk” may have difficulty obtaining
insurance through the regular “voluntary” market channels. (The term “high
risk” applies to individuals or individual businesses with a poor loss record due
to inadequate safety measures; certain kinds of businesses or professions where
the nature of the work is hazardous or where the risk of lawsuits is high; and
specific locations where the risk of theft, vandalism or severe storm damage is
substantial.) To make basic coverage more readily available to everyone who
wants or needs insurance, special insurance plans have been set up by state
regulators working with the insurance industry.
The business that insurers do not voluntarily assume is called the residual
market. Residual markets may also be called “shared,” because the profits and
losses of each type of residual market are shared by all insurers in the state selling that type of insurance, or involuntary, because insurers do not choose to
underwrite the business, in contrast to the regular voluntary market.
Residual market programs are rarely self-sufficient. Where the rates charged
to high-risk policyholders are too low to support the program’s operation, insurers are generally assessed to make up the difference. These additional costs are
typically passed on to all insurance consumers. However, in a few states, insurers are not able to recoup their residual market losses and political pressure prevents rates from rising to the level they should be actuarially.
The number of drivers and properties insured in the residual market fluctuates as lawmakers and regulators change laws or address availability, rate adequacy and other factors that influence underwriting decisions.
The Automobile Residual Market
The first of the residual market mechanisms for automobile coverage was established in New Hampshire in 1938. As states began to pass laws requiring drivers
to furnish proof of insurance, having auto liability insurance became a prerequisite for driving a car. Today, all 50 states and the District of Columbia use
one of four systems to guarantee that auto insurance is available to those who
need it. All four systems are commonly known as assigned risk plans, although
the term technically applies only to the first type of plan, where each insurer
is required to assume its share of residual market policyholders or “risks.” (The
62

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

term “risk” is used in the insurance industry to denote the policyholder or property insured as well as the chance of loss.) Commercial auto insurance is also
available through the residual market.
Automobile Insurance Plans: The assigned risk plan, the most common
type, currently found in 42 states and the District of Columbia, generally is
administered through an office created or supported by the state and governed
by a board representing insurance companies licensed in the state. Massachusetts began a three-year process of changing over to an assigned risk plan, beginning in April 2008. It formerly had a reinsurance pooling facility.
When agents or company representatives are unable to obtain auto insurance for an applicant in the voluntary market, they submit the application to
the assigned risk plan office. These applications are distributed randomly by the
automobile insurance plan to all insurance companies that offer automobile
liability coverage in the state in proportion to the amount of their voluntary
business. Thus, if on a given day the plan receives 100 applications from agents
around the state, a company with 10 percent of that state’s regular private passenger automobile insurance business will be assigned 10 of those applicants
and will be responsible for all associated losses.
Assigned risk policies usually are more restricted in the coverage they can
provide and have lower limits than voluntary market policies. In addition, premiums for assigned risk policies usually are significantly higher, although not
always sufficiently high enough to cover the increased costs of insuring highrisk drivers.
Joint Underwriting Associations (JUAs): Automobile JUAs, found in
four states, Florida, Hawaii, Michigan and Missouri, are state-mandated pooling mechanisms through which all companies doing business in the state share
the premiums of business outside the voluntary market as well as the profits
or losses and expenses incurred. To simplify the policyholder distribution process, insurance agents and company representatives are generally assigned one
of several servicing carriers (companies that have agreed for a fee to issue and
service JUA policies). They submit applications to that company, which then
issues the JUA policy. In Michigan, however, agents submit applications directly
to the JUA office, which then distributes them to the servicing carriers. Coverages offered by JUAs generally are the same as those offered in the voluntary
market but the limits may be lower. Although rates may be higher than in the
voluntary market, they may not be sufficient for the JUA to be self-sustaining.
State statutes setting up the JUA generally permit it to recoup losses by surcharg	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	63

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

ing policyholders or deducting losses from state premium taxes. (JUAs may be
set up for other lines of insurance, including homeowners insurance. JUAs for
commercial insurance coverage, such as medical malpractice and liquor liability,
may operate somewhat differently in some states, see below.)
Reinsurance Facilities: Reinsurance facilities exist in North Carolina, New
Hampshire and Massachusetts. (In Massachusetts, beginning in April 2008, the
reinsurance facility which is known as Commonwealth Automobile Insurers, or
CAR, began disbanding over a three-year period as the new ”managed competition” regulations take effect.) An automobile reinsurance facility is an unincorporated, nonprofit entity, through which auto insurers provide coverage and
service claims. After issuing a policy, an insurer decides whether to handle the
policy as part of its regular “voluntary business” or transfer it to the reinsurance
facility or pool. An insurer is permitted to transfer or “cede” to the pool a percentage of its policies. Premiums for this portion of business are sent to the pool
and companies bill the pool for claims payments and expenses. Profits or losses
are shared by all auto insurers licensed in the state.
State Fund: One state, Maryland, has a residual market mechanism for auto
insurance which is administered by the state. It was created in 1973. Private
insurers do not participate directly in the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund
(MAIF) but are required by law to subsidize any losses from the operation, with
the cost being charged back against their own policyholders. In years that the
fund has a loss, all Maryland insured drivers, including MAIF drivers, help offset
the deficit through an assessment mechanism.
Size of the Auto Insurance Market: Together, residual market programs
insured about 1.97 million cars in 2007, about 1.06 percent of the total market and a 9.0 percent drop from 2006, according to the Automobile Insurance
Plans Service Office, which tracks such data. In 1990 the residual market served
6.3 percent of the total market. In 2007, in a major change from much of the
1990s, only one state, North Carolina, had more than a million cars insured
through the residual market. At 1.5 million, the pool insured more than 21.6
percent of the state’s total insured vehicles. In South Carolina, which enacted
sweeping reforms in 1998, the residual market dropped from 38 percent of all
insured cars in 1996 to close to zero in 2007.
The Property Residual Market
Pools: FAIR Plans, Beach and Windstorm Plans, Assigned Risk and Others: A
pool is an organization of insurers or reinsurers through which particular types
64

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

of insurance coverage are provided. The pool acts as a single insuring entity,
as opposed to some JUAs and assigned risk plans where the policyholder deals
directly with an individual insurance company. Premiums, losses and expenses
are shared among pool members in agreed-upon amounts. The range of activities handled by the pool varies. Some pool operations are limited to redistributing premiums and losses, while others have broader functions similar to an
insurance company. Some pools use specific insurers as servicing carriers.
In pools composed of primary companies (as opposed to reinsurers), business is placed directly with the pool by the agent. (In a reinsurance pool, a
member company underwrites the risk, issues the policy and reinsures the
business in the pool, see below.) Pools may be mandated by state legislation or
established on a voluntary basis.
Pools assure that insurance is available to property owners in high-risk, generally urban or coastal areas, and businesses with a poor safety record or other
high risk characteristics. Among the best-known primary pooling arrangements
are property insurance plans, such as Beach and Windstorm Plans, which insure
owners of properties vulnerable to severe storm damage.
FAIR Plans: Thirty-two states and the District of Columbia currently have
property insurance plans known as FAIR, an acronym for Fair Access to Insurance Requirements Plans. The concept of FAIR Plans was established following
passage by Congress of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, a
measure designed to address the conditions that led to the 1967 urban riots.
This legislation made federal riot reinsurance available to those states that instituted such property insurance pools. One of the plans, Arkansas’ Rural Risk
Plan, was created in 1988 to provide a market for property insurance in rural
areas where fire protection is poor or nonexistent. Mississippi’s Rural Plan,
which offered fire, extended coverage and vandalism, see below, was expanded
to cover the entire state in 2003. (The state’s windstorm pool offers wind and
hail coverage in coastal counties to the Plan’s policyholders.) Georgia’s FAIR
Plan also provides windstorm and hail coverage in coastal counties as do Plans
in Massachusetts and New York. In most states where FAIR Plans are in operation, they are mandatory.
Beach and Windstorm Insurance Plans: Counterparts to the FAIR Plans are
Beach and Windstorm Insurance Plans, operated by property insurers in states
along the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts to assure that insurance is available for both
residences and commercial properties against damage from hurricanes and other
windstorms. Established between 1969 and 1971, Beach and Windstorm Plans
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	65

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

operate in a manner similar to FAIR Plans, except that properties must be located in a designated area to be eligible for insurance under the Plans.
There are currently five Beach and Windstorm Plans: Alabama, Mississippi,
South Carolina, North Carolina and Texas. In 2001 there were seven pools,
but Florida’s windstorm pool merged with the joint underwriting association
in 2002 to create a new type of residual market entity, see below. In a similar
move in 2003, Louisiana merged its FAIR Plan with its coastal pool. The Plans
are mandatory in all of these states with the exception of Alabama. (In addition,
hail and windstorm coverage for homes in coastal counties is available through
some FAIR Plans, see above and the WindMap in New Jersey.) Windstorm Plans
in Mississippi, South Carolina and Texas offer only wind and hail coverage.
Plans in Alabama and North Carolina offer coverage for fire as well. In some
states, Plan policyholders must buy flood insurance also.
Property owners who live in areas covered by Beach and Windstorm Plans
may be insured for windstorm losses by the Plan or by an individual insurance company. If an insurer has accepted all the windstorm risk it is prepared
to assume, an applicant for homeowners insurance may purchase a policy that
excludes windstorm coverage from the homeowners insurance company and
pay a separate premium for windstorm coverage to the Plan.
One disadvantage of Beach and Windstorm Plans, and the National Flood
Insurance Program, is that the availability of insurance encourages development
of coastal areas where construction otherwise would not be feasible and where
tax money must be spent to protect against continuous erosion to preserve the
property.
In the past there was a clear delineation between coastal and urban plans
with coastal properties insured under Beach and Windstorm Plans, and urban
properties under FAIR Plans. Increasingly, the distinctions are blurring. FAIR
Plans are acting as an insurer of last resort for residents who live in shoreline
communities in states that do not have a Beach and Windstorm Plan, such as
New York State. Beach and Windstorm Plans in some states are being merged
with FAIR Plans or joint underwriting associations, as in Florida and Louisiana,
or are administering new FAIR Plans, as in Texas. As a result, it is difficult to
compare the number of properties insured under any Plan with numbers from
earlier years. FAIR Plans have almost doubled in size, pushed up in large part by
these mergers and the increase in coastal properties in such states as New York
and Massachusetts, but also by more stringent underwriting standards on the
part of insurers in the voluntary market.

66

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

Residual Market Plan Mergers: In 2002 Florida’s two residual market
organizations, the JUA and the Florida Windstorm Underwriting Association,
merged to become the Citizens’ Property Insurance Corporation (CPIC). The
Florida CPIC, known as Citizens, has a tax-exempt status. This feature enables it
to finance loss payments in the event of a major disaster by issuing tax-exempt
bonds that carry low interest rates, thus reducing financing costs over the years
by hundreds of millions of dollars. In Louisiana, following Florida’s model, the
FAIR Plan and the Coastal Plan became the Louisiana Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in 2004.
Other Residual Market Entities
JUAs for Other Lines of Insurance: JUAs are not limited to automobile
insurance. At various times, there have been JUAs for residential insurance and
workers compensation. A number of states have medical malpractice JUAs, most
of which were set up in the 1970s or 1980s when the line was beset by high
losses.
Market Assistance Plans (MAPs): A MAP is a temporary, voluntary clearinghouse and referral system designed to put people looking for insurance in
touch with insurance companies. They are organized when something happens
to cause insurance companies to cut back on the amount of insurance they are
willing to provide. MAPs are generally administered by agents’ associations,
which assign insurance applications to a group of insurers doing business in a
state. These companies have agreed to take their share of applicants on a rotating basis.
MAPs may be organized for a single line of insurance, such as daycare
liability or homeowners insurance, or for a broad range of liability coverages.
Homeowners insurance MAPs have been formed in several East Coast states,
including Connecticut and Texas, and medical malpractice MAPs were created
in states such as Washington, when the medical community had difficulty finding malpractice insurance.
Workers Compensation Assigned Risk Plans and Pools:
The mechanism used to handle the workers compensation residual market varies from state to state. In the four remaining states with a monopolistic state
workers compensation fund (North Dakota, Ohio, Washington and Wyoming
switched to a competitive market in July 2008), all businesses are insured
through that fund. In most states with a competitive state fund (an entity that
competes for business with private insurers), the fund accepts all risks rejected
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	67

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Residual
Auto Insurance
Markets

by the voluntary market, thus eliminating the need for assigned risk plans. In
states without a competitive fund, insurers may be assigned applicants based on
their market share and service those employers as they would employers that
came to them through the voluntary market, through a system known as direct
assignment. They may also participate in the residual market through a reinsurance pooling arrangement.
Second Injury Funds: Second injury funds were created to encourage businesses to hire workers who are physically handicapped by congenital defects or the
residual effects of an accident or illness but due to other laws that now protect
the physically handicapped worker, such as the Americans With Disabilities Act,
some states are disbanding their fund.
Second injury funds receive money from insurance companies and employers as well as from legislative appropriations. Insurance company payments may
be based on a percentage of total compensation paid, premiums collected or the
nature of the specific injury. The second injury funds may be administered by
the state Workers Compensation Commission, Industrial Board or Department
of Labor.

68

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Terrorism RiskAuto
and Insurance

Terrorism Risk and Insurance
Prior to September 11, 2001, insurers provided terrorism coverage to their commercial insurance customers essentially free of charge because the chance of
property damage from terrorist acts was considered remote. After September 11,
which costs insurers about $31.6 billion, insurers began to reassess the risk. For
a while terrorism coverage was scarce. Reinsurers were unwilling to reinsure policies in urban areas perceived to be vulnerable to attack. Primary insurers filed
requests with their state insurance departments for permission to exclude terrorism coverage from their commercial policies.
Concerned about the limited availability of terrorism coverage in highrisk areas and its impact on the economy, Congress passed the Terrorism Risk
Insurance Act (TRIA). The Act provides a temporary program that, in the event
of major terrorist attack, allows the insurance industry and federal government
to share losses according to a specific formula. TRIA was signed into law on
November 26, 2002 and renewed again for two years in December 2005. Passage
of TRIA enabled a market for terrorism insurance to begin to develop because
the federal backstop effectively limits insurers’ losses, greatly simplifying the
underwriting process. TRIA was extended for another seven years to 2014 in
December 2007. The new law is known as the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program
Reauthorization Act (TRIPRA) of 2007.
The Difficulty of Insuring Terrorism Risk: From an insurance viewpoint,
terrorism risk is very different from the kind of risks typically insured. To be
readily insurable, risks have to have certain characteristics.
The risk must be measurable. Insurers must be able to determine the possible or probable number of events (frequency) likely to result in claims and the
maximum size or cost (severity) of these events. For example, insurers know
from experience about how many car crashes to expect per 100,000 miles driven
for any geographic area and what these crashes are likely to cost. As a result
they can charge a premium equal to the risk they are assuming in issuing an
auto insurance policy.
A large number of people or businesses must be exposed to the risk of loss
but only a few must actually experience one so that the premiums of those that
do not file claims can fund the losses of those who do. Losses must be random
as regards time, location and magnitude.
Insofar as acts of terrorism are intentional, terrorism risk does not have
these characteristics. In addition, no one knows what the worst case scenario
might be. There have been very few terrorist attacks, so there is little data on
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	69

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Terrorism
Auto Insurance
Risk and Insurance

which to base estimates of future losses, either in terms of frequency or severity.
Terrorism losses are also likely to be concentrated geographically, since terrorism
is usually targeted to produce a significant economic or psychological impact.
This leads to a situation known in the insurance industry as adverse selection,
where only the people most at risk purchase coverage, the same people who are
likely to file claims. Moreover, terrorism losses are never random. They are carefully planned and often coordinated.
Assessing Risk: To underwrite terrorism insurance—to decide whether to offer
coverage and what price to charge—insurers must be able to quantify the risk:
the likelihood of an event and the amount of damage it would cause. Increasingly, they are using sophisticated modeling tools to assess this risk. According
to the modeling firm, AIR Worldwide, the way terrorism risk is measured is not
much different from assessments of natural disaster risk, except that the data
used for terrorism are more subject to uncertainty. It is easier to project the risk
of damage in a particular location from an earthquake of a given intensity or a
Category 5 hurricane than a terrorist attack because insurers have had so much
more experience with natural disasters than with terrorist attacks and therefore
the data to incorporate into models are readily available.
One problem insurers face is the accumulation of risk. They need to know
not only the likelihood and extent of damage to a particular building but also
the company’s accumulated risk from insuring multiple buildings within a given
geographical area, including the implications of fire following a terrorist attack.
In addition, in the United States, workers compensation insurers face concentrations of risk from injuries to workers caused by terrorism attacks. Workers compensation policies provide coverage for loss of income and medical and rehabilitation treatment from “first dollar,” that is without deductibles.
Extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA): There is general
agreement that TRIA has helped insurance companies provide terrorism coverage because the federal government’s involvement offers a measure of certainty
as to the maximum size of losses insurers would have to pay and allows them
to plan for the future. However, when the Act came up for renewal in 2005 and
in 2007, there were some who believed that market forces should be allowed to
deal with the problem.
Both the U.S. Government Accountability Office and the President’s
Working Group on Financial Markets published reports on terrorism insurance
in September 2006. The two reports essentially supported the insurance industry in its evaluation of nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological (NBCR)
70

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
Terrorism RiskAuto
and Insurance

risk—that it is uninsurable—but unlike the insurance industry, the President’s
Working Group said that the existence of TRIA has negatively affected the
development of a more robust market for terrorism insurance, a point on which
the industry disagrees. TRIA is the reason that coverage is available, insurers say.
The structure of the program has encouraged the development of reinsurance
for the layers of risk that insurers must bear themselves—deductible amounts
and coinsurance—which in turn allows primary insurers to provide coverage.
TRIA and its extensions authorized the creation of a federal reinsurance
plan, which is triggered when insured terrorism losses exceed a predetermined
amount. The program, a sharing of losses between the insurance industry and
the federal government according to a preset formula—a type of reinsurance—
has enabled the commercial insurance market to function, even though the
threat of terrorism remains.
The law defines an act of terrorism under the 2007 amendment. To be covered by the federal program, an act of terrorism must be committed by individuals acting as part of an effort to influence the policy or conduct of the United
States. The law also requires that the act be certified by the Secretary of the
Treasury in concurrence with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General.
Insurers do not pay the federal government for this reinsurance coverage.
Only commercial insurers and causes of losses specified in the underlying
policies are covered. In addition to commercial lines insurers, insurers eligible
for coverage include residual market entities such as workers compensation
pools, state-licensed captive insurers and risk retention groups, see report on
captives. Personal lines insurance companies—those that sell auto and home
insurance—and reinsurers are not covered. Neither are group life insurance
losses. Most types of commercial insurance losses were covered under the original legislation, except some specialty coverages such as medical malpractice
and crop insurance. Some commercial insurance coverages were deleted under
the 2005 extension including commercial auto insurance, professional liability except for directors and officers liability, surety, burglary and theft and
farmowners multiperil, a coverage similar to homeowners.
In return for the federal backstop, commercial insurers must make terrorism
coverage available and conspicuously state the premium charges; policyholders can reject the offer and choose to mitigate this class of risk in other ways.
In offering terrorism coverage to their policyholders, commercial insurers must
make it available on the same terms and conditions as they offer in their nonTRIA coverage.
After September 11, to minimize the likelihood of a wave of liability claims,
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	71

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Terrorism
Auto Insurance
Risk and Insurance

Congress established the Federal Victims Compensation Act, which provided
nearly $7 billion in payments to families of September 11 victims. In return, victims’ families were required to give up the right to sue those they perceived as
responsible parties. This provision is not part of TRIA or its extension.
Mandated Coverages/Exclusions: In some states a doctrine know as “fire
following” applies. This means that in the event of a terrorist-caused explosion
followed by fire, insurers could be liable to pay out losses attributable to the fire
(but not the explosion) even if a commercial property owner had not purchased
terrorism coverage. A number of states have amended their standard fire policy
laws to exclude such coverage for acts of terrorism.
Injuries in the workplace resulting from terrorist attacks are covered under
state workers compensation laws. Workers compensation insurance is a mandatory coverage in all states but Texas.

72

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

WorkersAuto
Compensation
Insurance

Workers Compensation
Workers compensation insurance covers the cost of medical care and rehabilitation for workers injured on the job. It also compensates them for lost wages and
provides death benefits for their dependents if they are killed in work-related
accidents, including terrorist attacks. The workers compensation system is the
“exclusive remedy” for on-the-job injuries suffered by employees. As part of the
social contract embedded in each state’s law, the employee gives up the right to
sue the employer for injuries caused by the employer’s negligence and in return
receives workers compensation benefits regardless of who or what caused the
accident, as long as it happened in the workplace as a result of and in the course
of workplace activities.
Workers compensation systems vary from state to state. State statutes and
court decisions control many aspects, including the handling of claims, the
evaluation of impairment and settlement of disputes, the amount of benefits
injured workers receive and the strategies used to control costs.
Workers compensation costs are one of the many factors that influence
businesses to expand or relocate in a state, generating jobs. When premiums rise
sharply, legislators often call for reforms. The last round of widespread reform
legislation started in the late 1980s. In general, the reforms enabled employers and insurers to better control medical care costs through coordination and
oversight of the treatment plan and return-to-work process and to improve
workplace safety. Some states are now approaching a crisis once again as new
problems arise.
The Workers Compensation Social Contract: The industrial expansion that
took place in the United States during the 19th century was accompanied by a
significant increase in workplace accidents. At that time, the only way injured
workers could obtain compensation was to sue their employers for negligence.
Proving negligence was a costly, time-consuming effort, and often the court ruled
in favor of the employer. But by the early 1900s, a state-by-state pattern of legislative proposals designed to compensate injured workers had begun to emerge.
Wisconsin enacted the first permanent workers compensation insurance law
in 1911 (New York had enacted a law a year earlier but it was found unconstitutional), and by 1920 all but eight states had enacted similar laws. By 1949 all
states had a workers compensation system that provided compensation to workers hurt on the job, regardless of who was at fault. The costs of medical treatment and wage loss benefits were the responsibility of the employer which were
paid through the workers compensation system.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	73

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Workers
Auto Insurance
Compensation

The scope of workers compensation coverage has broadened considerably since its early beginnings. In 1972, states amended their laws to meet
performance standards recommended by the National Commission on State
Workmen’s Compensation Laws. Many states took action not only to expand
benefits but also to make the coverage applicable to classifications of employees
not previously covered.
However, compensation levels are not uniform. In some states benefits are
still inadequate, while in others, they are overly generous. Some states were
slow in adopting the National Commission’s guidelines and have still not
embraced the entire package of 19 recommendations published in 1972. Many
states exempt employers with only a few workers (fewer than five, four or three,
depending on the state) from mandatory coverage laws. A major benefits issue
still to be resolved in some states is the imbalance between levels of compensation for various degrees of impairment; permanent partial disabilities tend to be
overcompensated and permanent total disability undercompensated.
Some coverage for workers compensation is provided by federal programs.
For example, the Longshoremen’s and Harbor Workers Compensation Act,
passed in 1927 and substantially amended in 1984, provides coverage for certain
maritime employees and the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act protects
workers hired by the U.S. government.
Employers can purchase workers compensation coverage from private insurance companies or state-run workers agencies, known as state funds. In 14
states, state funds compete with private insurers (competitive funds) and in four
states, the state is the sole provider of workers compensation insurance. State
funds also function as the insurer of last resort for businesses that have difficulty getting coverage in the open market.
The only state in which workers compensation coverage is truly optional is
Texas, where about one-third of the state’s employers are so-called nonsubscribers. Those that opt out of the system can be sued by employees for failure to
provide a safe workplace. The nonsubscribers tend to be smaller companies, but
the percentage of larger companies opting out has been growing.
Some businesses finance their own workplace injury benefits through a
system known as self-insurance. Large organizations with many employees can
often estimate the cost of routine types of injuries. Self-insurance, along with
large deductibles, which are in effect self-insurance, now account for more than
one-third of traditional market premium.
About nine out of 10 people in the nation’s workforce are protected by
workers compensation insurance.
74

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Insurance Topics
WorkersAuto
Compensation
Insurance

How the System Works: Workers compensation systems are administered by
the individual states, generally by commissions or boards whose responsibility
it is to ensure compliance with the laws, investigate and decide disputed cases,
and collect data. In most states employers are required to keep records of accidents. Accidents must be reported to the workers compensation board and to
the company’s insurer within a specified number of days.
Workers compensation covers an injured worker’s medical care and
attempts to cover his or her economic loss. This includes loss of earnings and
the extra expenses associated with the injury. Injured workers receive all medically necessary and appropriate treatment from the first day of injury or illness
and rehabilitation when the disability is severe.
To rein in expenditures and improve cost effectiveness, many states have
adopted cost control measures, including treatment guidelines that spell out
acceptable treatments and diagnostic tests for specific injuries such as lower
back injuries and fee schedules that set maximum payment amounts to doctors
for certain types of care.
Most claims are medical only, but lost-time claims, those with both medical and lost income payments, though few, consume most resources. Claims
are categorized according to the degree of impairment—partial or total disability—and whether the impairment is permanent or temporary. Cash benefits can
include impairment benefits and, when the impairment causes a loss of income,
disability or wage loss benefits.
Impairment can be defined in several ways. Payments may be based on a
schedule or list of body parts covered and the benefits paid for a loss of that
part. For injuries not on the schedule, benefit payments may be calculated
according to the degree of impairment or the loss of future or current earnings
capacity, often using the American Medical Association’s definitions.
Most states pay benefits for the duration of the injury. But some specify a
maximum number of weeks, particularly for temporary disabilities. For workers
with a total disability, the benefit amount is some percentage of the worker’s
weekly wage (actual or state average). Cash benefits may not be paid until after
a waiting period of several days.
Costs to Employers: Costs to employers include premiums, payments made
under deductibles and the benefits and administrative costs incurred by employers that self-insure or fund their own benefit program. In the mid-1950s, private
sector employers paid an average 0.5 percent of payroll for workers compensation. By 1970 this figure was 1 percent. Employer costs escalated steeply in the
1980s and 1990s, reaching a record high in 1994 of 2.99 percent. Since then
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	75

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

Workers
Auto Insurance
Compensation

they have fluctuated. Estimates by John Burton in the Workers Compensation Policy Review, January/February 2008 put workers compensation costs as
a percentage of payroll in 2007 at 2.28, up from a 10-year low of 1.92 in 2001.
The NCCI estimates that in 2008 employers’ workers compensation insurance
costs accounted for 1.7 percent of total compensation costs. However, there is
a wide variation in costs among states and industries, so that the highest rated
(the inherent riskiest) groups could pay several hundred times that of the lowest
rated (safest) groups, as a percentage of payroll. Also taken into account is the
firm’s own safety record.
Reducing Costs: Workers compensation system costs are rarely static.
Reforms are implemented and then, over time, one or more elements in these
multifaceted systems get out of balance. Some employers and legislators complain that the cost of coverage is hurting the state’s economy by reducing its
ability to compete with other states for new job-producing opportunities.
In the 1980s, with a view to increasing competition within the insurance
industry in order to bring down rates, legislation was introduced in more than a
dozen states to change the method of establishing rates from administered pricing, where rating organizations recommended rates that included expenses and
a margin for profit, to open competition. Now insurers base their rate filings
on more of their own company’s specific data, rather than using industrywide
figures in such areas as expenses and profit and contingency allowances. Rating
organizations still provide industrywide data on “losses”—the costs associated
with work-related accidents, which help small companies that lack access to
large amounts of data.
The aim of the workers compensation system is to help workers recover
from work-related accidents and illnesses and to return to the workplace. A fast
return to work is desirable from the employer and insurer’s viewpoint, lowering
claim costs for the insurer but benefiting the worker too.
Another factor pushing up costs in some states is the amount of attorney
involvement. Workers compensation programs were originally intended to be
“no-fault” systems and therefore litigation-free.
However today, attorneys are involved in 5 to 10 percent of all workers
compensation claims in most states—but in as much as 20 percent in systems
where the number of disputes is high and in roughly a third of claims where the
worker was injured seriously.
Although attorney involvement boosts claim costs by 12 to 15 percent,
because claimants must pay attorneys’ fees there is generally no net gain in
76

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Insurance Topics

Updates at www.iii.org/issues_updates

WorkersAuto
Compensation
Insurance

the actual benefits received. The involvement of an attorney does not necessarily indicate formal litigation proceedings. Sometimes, injured workers turn to
attorneys to help them negotiate what they believe is a confusing and complex
system. Increasingly, states are trying to make the system easier to understand
and to use.
The workers compensation system plays a major role in improving workplace safety. An employer’s workers compensation premium reflects the relative
hazards to which workers are exposed and the employer’s claim record. About
one-half of states allow what is known as “schedule rating,” a discount or rate
credit for superior workplace safety programs.
Workers Compensation Residual Markets: Residual markets, traditionally
the market of last resort, are an important segment of the workers comp market.
Workers comp residual plans are administered by the NCCI in 29 jurisdictions.
In some states, particularly where rates in the voluntary market are inadequate,
the residual market provides coverage for a large portion of policyholders.
Terrorism Coverage: Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, workers compensation insurers have been taking a closer look at their exposures to
catastrophes, both natural and man-made. According to a report by Risk Management Solutions, if the earthquake that shook San Francisco in 1906 were to
happen today, it could cause as many as 78,000 injuries, 5,000 deaths and over
$7 billion in workers compensation losses.
Workers compensation claims for terrorism could cost an insurer anywhere
from $300,000 to $1 million per employee, depending on the state. As a result,
firms with a concentration of employees in a single building in major metropolitan areas, such as New York, or near a “trophy building” are now considered
high risk, a classification that used to apply only to people in dangerous jobs
such as roofing.
STATES WITH A STATE-RUN WORKERS COMPENSATION FUND

Competitive with Private Insurers

Exclusive

Arizona 

Maryland

Oregon

North Dakota

California

Minnesota

Pennsylvania

Ohio

Colorado

Montana

Texas

Washington

Idaho

New York

Utah

Wyoming  

Kentucky
Oklahoma
West Virginia
 Scheduled to be privatized by 2013.
  Compulsory for extra hazardous operations only. Employers with nonhazardous operations may insure with
the state fund or opt to go without coverage.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	77

 
ary

s
Glos

401(K) PLAN
An employer-sponsored retirement savings
plan funded by employee contributions,
which may or may not be matched by the
employer. Federal laws allow employees to
invest pretax dollars, up to a stated maximum each year.

 403(B) PLAN
In the United States, an arrangement that
allows not-for-profit employers and their
employees to make contributions to a taxdeferred retirement savings plan established for the benefit of employees.

529 SAVINGS PLANS
State-administered plans designed to
encourage households to save for college education. Named after a part of the

Internal Revenue tax code, these saving
plans allow earnings to accumulate free of
federal income tax and sometimes to be
withdrawn to pay for college costs taxfree.
There are two types of plans: savings and
prepaid tuition. Plan assets are managed
either by the state’s treasurer or an outside
investment company. Most offer a range of
investment options.

A
A-SHARE VARIABLE ANNUITY
A form of variable annuity contract where
the contract holder pays sales charges up
front rather than eventually having to pay
a surrender charge.

 Terms marked with an asterisk ( ) are from LOMA’s Glossary of Insurance and Financial Services Terms. Copyright © 2002 LL Global,
Inc. Used with permission from LL Global. All rights reserved. Copying these terms without permission from LL Global is a violation of U.S. federal law and international law. For information on purchasing a copy of the Glossary or for additional information on LOMA, an operating division
of LL Global, and its educational programs, visit LOMA’s website at www.loma.org.
Terms from the LOMA Glossary appear in this Handbook by special permission of LL Global, Inc., which has an operating division known
as LOMA. However, LL Global makes no representation or endorsement, express or implied, regarding this Handbook, its owner or its products
or services. LL Global is not related to the owner of this Handbook in any way and use of this Glossary does not indicate a sponsorship, endorsement or affiliation with or by LL Global. By choosing to read these terms, you hereby agree not to use or rely on the definitions contained in the
LOMA Glossary in interpreting any particular policy or contract or groups of policies or contracts, whether issued by the owner of this Handbook
or anyone else or in connection with the interpretation of a legal or insurance issue. These definitions are for general informational and educational
purposes only. You should consult a qualified professional for interpretation of terms in a specific contract. LL Global does not interpret insurance policies in whole or in part and LL Global is not legally responsible for any interpretation of policy or contract terms used by any insurer, the
owner of this Handbook or any other person.
Furthermore, the Glossary is a compilation of definitions from various LOMA texts; however, it is not an assigned text for any LOMA
course. Sometimes a definition in the Glossary will differ somewhat from the definition in a text because of the nuances of the subject matter in the
text. A student taking an exam always should rely on the definition in the assigned text rather than the one in the Glossary.
78

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

 ABSOLUTE ASSIGNMENT
An irrevocable transfer of complete ownership of a life insurance policy or an annuity
from one party to another. Contrast with
Collateral assignment. (See Assignment)

ACCELERATED DEATH BENEFITS
A life insurance policy option that provides
policy proceeds to insured individuals over
their lifetimes, in the event of a terminal
illness. This is in lieu of a traditional policy
that pays beneficiaries after the insured’s
death. Such benefits kick in if the insured
becomes terminally ill, needs extreme
medical intervention, or must reside in a
nursing home. The payments made while
the insured is living are deducted from any
death benefits paid to beneficiaries.

ACCIDENT AND HEALTH INSURANCE
Coverage for accidental injury, accidental
death, and related health expenses. Benefits
will pay for preventative services, medical
expenses and catastrophic care, with limits.

 ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFIT (ADB)
A supplementary life insurance policy
benefit that provides a death benefit in
addition to the policy’s basic death benefit
if the insured’s death occurs as the result of
an accident. (See Double indemnity benefit)

 ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND
DISMEMBERMENT (AD&D) BENEFIT
A supplementary life insurance policy
benefit that provides for an amount of
money in addition to the policy’s basic
death benefit. This additional amount is
payable if the insured dies as the result of
an accident or if the insured loses any two
limbs or the sight in both eyes as the result
of an accident.

ACCOUNT RECEIVABLES
See Receivables.

	

 ACCUMULATION AT INTEREST
DIVIDEND OPTION
An option, available to the owners of participating insurance policies, that allows a
policy owner to leave policy dividends on
deposit with the insurer and earn interest.
(See Dividends)

ACTUAL CASH VALUE
A form of insurance that pays damages
equal to the replacement value of damaged
property minus depreciation. (See Replacement cost)

ACTUARY
An insurance professional skilled in the
analysis, evaluation and management of
statistical information. Evaluates insurance
firms’ reserves, determines rates and rating
methods, and determines other business
and financial risks.

ADDITIONAL LIVING EXPENSES
Extra charges covered by homeowners policies over and above the policyholder’s customary living expenses. They kick in when
the insured requires temporary shelter due
to damage by a covered peril that makes
the home temporarily uninhabitable.

 ADDITIONAL TERM
INSURANCE OPTION
An option available to owners of participating insurance policies under which the
insurer uses a policy dividend as a net
single premium to purchase one-year term
insurance on the insured’s life. Also known
as fifth dividend option. (See Dividend;
Policy dividend options)

 ADJUSTABLE LIFE INSURANCE
A form of life insurance that allows policy
owners to vary the type of coverage provided by their policies as their insurance
needs change.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	79

 
Glossary

ADJUSTER

AFTERMARKET PARTS

An individual employed by a property/casualty insurer to evaluate losses and settle
policyholder claims. These adjusters differ
from public adjusters, who negotiate with
insurers on behalf of policyholders, and
receive a portion of a claims settlement.
Independent adjusters are independent
contractors who adjust claims for different
insurance companies.

See Crash parts; Generic auto parts.

ADMITTED ASSETS
Assets recognized and accepted by state
insurance laws in determining the solvency
of insurers and reinsurers. To make it easier
to assess an insurance company’s financial
position, state statutory accounting rules
do not permit certain assets to be included
on the balance sheet. Only assets that can
be easily sold in the event of liquidation
or borrowed against, and receivables for
which payment can be reasonably anticipated, are included in admitted assets. (See
Assets)

ADMITTED COMPANY
An insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in a particular state.

ADVERSE SELECTION
The tendency of those exposed to a higher
risk to seek more insurance coverage than
those at a lower risk. Insurers react either
by charging higher premiums or not
insuring at all, as in the case of floods.
(Flood insurance is provided by the federal
government but sold mostly through the
private market.) In the case of natural disasters, such as earthquakes, adverse selection
concentrates risk instead of spreading it.
Insurance works best when risk is shared
among large numbers of policyholders.

AGENCY COMPANIES
Companies that market and sell products
via independent agents.

AGENT
Insurance is sold by two types of agents:
independent agents, who are self-employed,
represent several insurance companies and
are paid on commission; and exclusive or
captive agents, who represent only one
insurance company and are either salaried
or work on commission. Insurance companies that use exclusive or captive agents are
called direct writers.

 ALEATORY CONTRACT
A contract in which one party provides
something of value to another party in
exchange for a conditional promise, which
is a promise that the other party will
perform a stated act upon the occurrence
of an uncertain event. Insurance contracts
are aleatory because the policyowner pays
premiums to the insurer, and in return
the insurer promises to pay benefits if the
event insured against occurs. Contrast with
Commutative contract.

ALIEN INSURANCE COMPANY
An insurance company incorporated under
the laws of a foreign country, as opposed to
a “foreign” insurance company which does
business in states outside its own.

ALLIED LINES
Property insurance that is usually bought
in conjunction with fire insurance; it includes wind, water damage and vandalism
coverage.

AFFINITY SALES

ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE
RESOLUTION/ADR

Selling insurance through groups such as
professional and business associations.

An alternative to going to court to settle
disputes. Methods include arbitration,

80

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

where disputing parties agree to be bound
to the decision of an independent third
party, and mediation, where a third party
tries to arrange a settlement between the
two sides.

ALTERNATIVE MARKETS
Nontraditional mechanisms used to
finance risk. This includes captives, which
are insurers owned by one or more noninsurers to provide owners with coverage.
Risk-retention groups, formed by members
of similar professions or businesses to obtain liability insurance and self-insurance,
are also included.

ANNUAL ANNUITY CONTRACT FEE
Covers the cost of administering an annuity contract.

ties allow payments to begin within about
a year of purchase.

ANNUITY ACCUMULATION
PHASE OR PERIOD
The period during which the owner of a
deferred annuity makes payments to build
up assets.

ANNUITY ADMINISTRATIVE
CHARGES
Covers the cost of customer services for
owners of variable annuities.

ANNUITY BENEFICIARY
In certain types of annuities, a person who
receives annuity contract payments if the
annuity owner or annuitant dies while payments are still due.

 ANNUITY CERTAIN

ANNUAL STATEMENT
Summary of an insurer’s or reinsurer’s
financial operations for a particular year,
including a balance sheet. It is filed with
the state insurance department of each jurisdiction in which the company is licensed
to conduct business.

A type of annuity contract that pays periodic income benefits for a stated period of
time, regardless of whether the annuitant
lives or dies. Also known as period certain
annuity. Contrast with Straight life annuity.
(See Payout options)

ANNUITY CONTRACT

ANNUITANT
The person who receives the income from
an annuity contract. Usually the owner of
the contract or his or her spouse.

An agreement similar to an insurance
policy for other insurance products such as
auto insurance.

ANNUITY CONTRACT OWNER

ANNUITIZATION
The conversion of the account balance
of a deferred annuity contract to income
payments.

ANNUITY
A life insurance product that pays periodic
income benefits for a specific period of
time or over the course of the annuitant’s
lifetime. There are two basic types of annuities: deferred and immediate. Deferred
annuities allow assets to grow tax-deferred
over time before being converted to payments to the annuitant. Immediate annui	

The person or entity that purchases an
annuity and has all rights to the contract.
Usually, but not always, the annuitant (the
person who receives incomes from the
contract).

 ANNUITY COST
A monetary amount that is equal to the
present value of future periodic income
payments under an annuity. (See Gross annuity cost; Income date; Net annuity cost)

 ANNUITY DATE
See Income date.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	81

 
Glossary

ANNUITY DEATH BENEFITS
The guarantee that if an annuity contract
owner dies before annuitization (the switchover from the savings to the payment
phase) the beneficiary will receive the value
of the annuity that is due.

ANNUITY INSURANCE CHARGES
Covers administrative and mortality and
expense risk costs.

ANNUITY INVESTMENT
MANAGEMENT FEE
The fee paid for the management of variable annuity invested assets.

ANNUITY ISSUER
The insurance company that issues the
annuity.

ANNUITY PROSPECTUS
Legal document providing detailed information about variable annuity contracts.
Must be offered to each prospective buyer.

mits insurers to jointly develop common
insurance forms and share loss data to help
them price policies.

APPORTIONMENT
The dividing of a loss proportionately
among two or more insurers that cover the
same loss.

APPRAISAL
A survey to determine a property’s insurable value, or the amount of a loss.

ARBITRATION
Procedure in which an insurance company
and the insured or a vendor agree to settle
a claim dispute by accepting a decision
made by a third party.

ARSON
The deliberate setting of a fire.

ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES

The cost of an annuity based on such factors as the age and gender of the contract
owner.

Bonds that represent pools of loans of
similar types, duration and interest rates.
Almost any loan with regular repayments
of principal and interest can be securitized,
from auto loans and equipment leases to
credit card receivables and mortgages.

 ANTISELECTION

ASSETS

The tendency of individuals who suspect or
know they are more likely than average to
experience loss to apply for or renew insurance to a greater extent than people who
lack such knowledge of probable loss. Also
known as adverse selection and selection
against the company.

Property owned, in this case by an insurance company, including stocks, bonds
and real estate. Insurance accounting is
concerned with solvency and the ability to
pay claims. State insurance laws therefore
require a conservative valuation of assets,
prohibiting insurance companies from
listing assets on their balance sheets whose
values are uncertain, such as furniture, fixtures, debit balances and accounts receivable that are more than 90 days past due.
(See Admitted assets)

ANNUITY PURCHASE RATE

ANTITRUST LAWS
Laws that prohibit companies from working as a group to set prices, restrict supplies
or stop competition in the marketplace.
The insurance industry is subject to state
antitrust laws but has a limited exemption
from federal antitrust laws. This exemption,
set out in the McCarran-Ferguson Act, per82

ASSIGNED RISK PLANS
Facilities through which drivers can obtain
auto insurance if they are unable to buy it

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

in the regular or voluntary market. These
are the most well-known type of residual
auto insurance market, which exist in every
state. In an assigned risk plan, all insurers selling auto insurance in the state are
assigned these drivers to insure, based on
the amount of insurance they sell in the
regular market. (See Residual market)

 ASSIGNMENT
An agreement under which one party—
the assignor—transfers some or all of
his owner-ship rights in a particular
property, such as a life insurance policy
or an annuity contract, to another party—
the assignee. (See Absolute assignment;
Collateral assignment)

 ASSOCIATION GROUP
A type of group that generally is eligible
for group insurance and that consists of
members of an association of individuals
formed for a purpose other than to obtain
insurance coverage, such as teachers’ associations and physicians’ associations.

6. Uninsured motorists coverage, for costs
resulting from an accident involving a
hit-and-run driver or a driver who does
not have insurance.

AUTO INSURANCE PREMIUM
The price an insurance company charges
for coverage, based on the frequency and
cost of potential accidents, theft and other
losses. Prices vary from company to company, as with any product or service. Premiums also vary depending on the amount
and type of coverage purchased; the make
and model of the car; and the insured’s
driving record, years of driving and the
number of miles the car is driven per year.
Other factors taken into account include
the driver’s age and gender, where the car
is most likely to be driven and the times of
day—rush hour in an urban neighborhood
or leisure time driving in rural areas, for
example. Some insurance companies may
also use credit history related information.
(See Insurance score)

AVIATION INSURANCE

AUTO INSURANCE POLICY
There are basically six different types of
coverages. Some may be required by law.
Others are optional. They are:
1. Bodily injury liability, for injuries the
policyholder causes to someone else.
2. Medical payments or Personal Injury
Protection (PIP) for treatment of
injuries to the driver and passengers of
the policyholder’s car.
3. Property damage liability, for damage
the policyholder causes to someone
else’s property.
4. Collision, for damage to the
policyholder’s car from a collision.
5. Comprehensive, for damage to the policyholder’s car not involving a collision
with another car (including damage
from fire, explosions, earthquakes,
floods, and riots), and theft.
	

Commercial airlines hold property insurance on airplanes and liability insurance
for negligent acts that result in injury or
property damage to passengers or others.
Damage is covered on the ground and in
the air. The policy limits the geographical
area and individual pilots covered.

B
B-SHARE VARIABLE ANNUITY
A form of variable annuity contract with
no initial sales charge but if the contract
is cancelled the holder pays deferred sales
charges (usually from 5 to 7 percent the
first year, declining to zero after from 5 to 7
years). The most common form of annuity
contract.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	83

 
Glossary

BALANCE SHEET

 BENEFICIARY

Provides a snapshot of a company’s financial condition at one point in time. It
shows assets, including investments and
reinsurance, and liabilities, such as loss
reserves to pay claims in the future, as of
a certain date. It also states a company’s
equity, known as policyholder surplus.
Changes in that surplus are one indicator
of an insurer’s financial standing.

The person or legal entity the owner of
an insurance policy names to receive the
policy benefit if the event insured against
occurs. (See Annuity beneficiary; Contingent beneficiary; Irrevocable beneficiary)

BANK HOLDING COMPANY
A company that owns or controls one
or more banks. The Federal Reserve has
responsibility for regulating and supervising bank holding company activities, such
as approving acquisitions and mergers and
inspecting the operations of such companies. This authority applies even though a
bank owned by a holding company may
be under the primary supervision of the
Comptroller of the Currency or the FDIC.

BASIS POINT
0.01 percent of the yield of a mortgage,
bond or note. The smallest measure used.

BEACH AND WINDSTORM PLANS
State-sponsored insurance pools that sell
property coverage for the peril of windstorm to people unable to buy it in the
voluntary market because of their high
exposure to risk. Several states offer these
plans to cover residential and commercial
properties against hurricanes and other
windstorms. (See Fair access to insurance
requirements plans/FAIR plans; Residual
market)

BINDER
Temporary authorization of coverage issued
prior to the actual insurance policy.

BLANKET INSURANCE
Coverage for more than one type of property at one location or one type of property
at more than one location. Example: chain
stores.

BODILY INJURY LIABILITY
COVERAGE
Portion of an auto insurance policy that
covers injuries the policyholder causes to
someone else.

BOILER AND MACHINERY
INSURANCE
Often called Equipment Breakdown, or Systems Breakdown insurance. Commercial insurance that covers damage caused by the
malfunction or breakdown of boilers, and a
vast array of other equipment including air
conditioners, heating, electrical, telephone
and computer systems.

BOND
A security that obligates the issuer to
pay interest at specified intervals and to
repay the principal amount of the loan at
maturity. In insurance, a form of suretyship. Bonds of various types guarantee a
payment or a reimbursement for financial
losses resulting from dishonesty, failure to
perform and other acts.

BOND RATING
An evaluation of a bond’s financial
strength, conducted by such major ratings

84

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

agencies as Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s
Investors Service.

BOOK OF BUSINESS
Total amount of insurance on an insurer’s
books at a particular point in time.

BROKER
An intermediary between a customer and
an insurance company. Brokers typically
search the market for coverage appropriate
to their clients. They work on commission
and usually sell commercial, not personal,
insurance. In life insurance, agents must
be licensed as securities brokers/dealers to
sell variable annuities, which are similar to
stock market-based investments.

BURGLARY AND THEFT INSURANCE
Insurance for the loss of property due to
burglary, robbery or larceny. It is provided
in a standard homeowners policy and in a
business multiple peril policy.

BUSINESS INCOME INSURANCE
Commercial coverage that reimburses a
business owner for lost profits and continuing fixed expenses during the time that a
business must stay closed while the premises are being restored because of physical
damage from a covered peril, such as a
fire. Business income insurance also may
cover financial losses that may occur if civil
authorities limit access to an area after a
disaster and their actions prevent customers from reaching the business premises.
Depending on the policy, civil authorities
coverage may start after a waiting period
and last for two or more weeks. Also known
as business interruption insurance.

BUSINESSOWNERS POLICY/BOP
A policy that combines property, liability
and business interruption coverages for
small- to medium-sized businesses. Coverage is generally cheaper than if purchased
through separate insurance policies.
	

C
C-SHARE VARIABLE ANNUITIES
A form of variable annuity contract where
the contract holder pays no sales fee up
front or surrender charges. Owners can
claim full liquidity at any time.

CAPACITY
The supply of insurance available to meet
demand. Capacity depends on the industry’s financial ability to accept risk. For an
individual insurer, the maximum amount
of risk it can underwrite based on its financial condition. The adequacy of an insurer’s
capital relative to its exposure to loss is an
important measure of solvency. A property/
casualty insurer must maintain a certain
level of capital and policyholder surplus to
underwrite risks. This capital is known as
capacity. When the industry is hit by high
losses, such as after the World Trade Center
terrorist attack, capacity is diminished. It
can be restored by increases in net income,
favorable investment returns, reinsuring
more risk and or raising additional capital. When there is excess capacity, usually
because of a high return on investments,
premiums tend to decline as insurers compete for market share. As premiums decline,
underwriting losses are likely to grow,
reducing capacity and causing insurers
to raise rates and tighten conditions and
limits in an effort to increase profitability.
Policyholder surplus is sometimes used as a
measure of capacity.

CAPITAL
Shareholder’s equity (for publicly traded insurance companies) and retained earnings
(for mutual insurance companies). There
is no general measure of capital adequacy
for property/casualty insurers. Capital
adequacy is linked to the riskiness of an
insurer’s business. A company underwriting medical device manufacturers needs a

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	85

 
Glossary

larger cushion of capital than a company
writing Main Street business, for example.
(See Risk-based capital; Solvency; Surplus)

CAPITAL MARKETS
The markets in which equities and debt are
traded. (See Securitization of insurance risk)

CAPTIVE AGENT
A person who represents only one insurance company and is restricted by agreement from submitting business to any
other company, unless it is first rejected by
the agent’s captive company. (See Exclusive
agent)

CAPTIVES
Insurers that are created and wholly owned
by one or more non-insurers, to provide
owners with coverage. A form of self-insurance.

CAR YEAR
Equal to 365 days of insured coverage for a
single vehicle. It is the standard measurement for automobile insurance.

CASE MANAGEMENT
A system of coordinating medical services
to treat a patient, improve care and reduce
cost. A case manager coordinates health
care delivery for patients.

 CASH DIVIDEND OPTION
For participating insurance policies, a dividend option under which the insurer sends
the policy owner a check in the amount of
the policy dividend. (See Dividend; Policy
dividend options)

 CASH PAYMENT OPTION
One of several nonforfeiture options
included in life insurance policies and
some annuity contracts that allows a policy
owner to receive the cash surrender value
of a life insurance policy or an annuity contract in a single payment. Also known as
86

cash surrender option. (See Cash surrender
value; Nonforfeiture options)

 CASH SURRENDER VALUE
(1) For life insurance, the amount, before
adjustments for factors such as policy
loans, that the owner of a permanent life
insurance policy is entitled to receive if
the policy does not remain in force until
the insured’s death. (2) For annuities, the
amount of a deferred annuity’s accumulated value, less any surrender charges, that
the contract holder is entitled to receive if
the policy is surrendered during its accumulation period. Also known as cash value
and surrender value.

 CASH VALUE
See Cash surrender value.

CATASTROPHE
Term used for statistical recording purposes
to refer to a single incident or a series of
closely related incidents causing severe
insured property losses totaling more than
a given amount, currently $25 million.

CATASTROPHE BONDS
Risk-based securities that pay high interest rates and provide insurance companies
with a form of reinsurance to pay losses
from a catastrophe such as those caused by
a major hurricane. They allow insurance
risk to be sold to institutional investors in
the form of bonds, thus spreading the risk.
(See Securitization of insurance risk)

CATASTROPHE DEDUCTIBLE
A percentage or dollar amount that a
homeowner must pay before the insurance policy kicks in when a major natural
disaster occurs. These large deductibles
limit an insurer’s potential losses in such
cases, allowing it to insure more property.
A property insurer may not be able to buy
reinsurance to protect its own bottom line

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

unless it keeps its potential maximum
losses under a certain level.

CHARTERED FINANCIAL
CONSULTANT/ChFC

CATASTROPHE FACTOR
Probability of catastrophic loss, based on
the total number of catastrophes in a state
over a 40-year period.

CATASTROPHE MODEL

A professional designation given by The
American College to financial services
professionals who complete courses in
financial planning.

CHARTERED LIFE
UNDERWRITER/CLU

Using computers, a method to mesh longterm disaster information with current
demographic, building and other data to
determine the potential cost of natural
disasters and other catastrophic losses for a
given geographic area.

A professional designation by The American College for those who pass business
examinations on insurance, investments
and taxation, and have life insurance planning experience.

CATASTROPHE REINSURANCE

CHARTERED PROPERTY/
CASUALTY UNDERWRITER/CPCU

Reinsurance for catastrophic losses. The
insurance industry is able to absorb the
multibillion dollar losses caused by natural
and man-made disasters such as hurricanes,
earthquakes and terrorist attacks because
losses are spread among thousands of
companies including catastrophe reinsurers
who operate on a global basis. Insurers’
ability and willingness to sell insurance
fluctuates with the availability and cost
of catastrophe reinsurance. After major
disasters, such as Hurricane Andrew and
the World Trade Center terrorist attack,
the availability of catastrophe reinsurance
becomes extremely limited. Claims
deplete reinsurers’ capital and, as a result,
companies are more selective in the type
and amount of risks they assume. In
addition, with available supply limited,
prices for reinsurance rise. This contributes
to an overall increase in prices for property
insurance.

CELLPHONE INSURANCE
Separate insurance provided to cover cell
phones for damage or theft. Policies are
often sold with the cell phones themselves.

	

A professional designation given by the
American Institute for Chartered Property
Casualty Underwriters. National examinations and three years of work experience
are required.

CLAIMS MADE POLICY
A form of insurance that pays claims
presented to the insurer during the term
of the policy or within a specific term after
its expiration. It limits liability insurers’
exposure to unknown future liabilities. (See
Occurrence policy)

COBRA
Short for Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act. A federal law under
which group health plans sponsored by
employers with 20 or more employees must
offer continuation of coverage to employees who leave their jobs and their dependents. The employee must pay the entire
premium. Coverage can be extended up
to 18 months. Surviving dependents can
receive longer coverage.

COINSURANCE
In property insurance, requires the policyholder to carry insurance equal to a specified percentage of the value of property to

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	87

 
Glossary

receive full payment on a loss. For health
insurance, it is a percentage of each claim
above the deductible paid by the policyholder. For a 20 percent health insurance
coinsurance clause, the policyholder pays for
the deductible plus 20 percent of his covered
losses. After paying 80 percent of losses up to
a specified ceiling, the insurer starts paying
100 percent of losses.

COLLATERAL
Property that is offered to secure a loan or
other credit and that becomes subject to
seizure on default. Also called security.

policy in a number of technical respects.
(See Auto Insurance Policy).

COMMERCIAL GENERAL
LIABILITY INSURANCE/CGL
A broad commercial policy that covers all
liability exposures of a business that are not
specifically excluded. Coverage includes
product liability, completed operations,
premises and operations, and independent
contractors.

COMMERCIAL LINES

Products designed for and bought by businesses. Among the major coverages are boiler
and machinery, business income, commercial
 COLLATERAL ASSIGNMENT
auto, comprehensive general liability, direcA temporary transfer of some of the ownership rights in a particular property, such as a tors and officers liability, fire and allied lines,
life insurance policy or an annuity contract, inland marine, medical malpractice liability,
product liability, professional liability, surety
as collateral for a loan. The transfer is made
and fidelity, and workers compensation.
on the condition that upon payment of the
Most of these commercial coverages can be
debt for which the contract is collateral, all
purchased separately except business income,
transferred rights shall revert back to the
original owner. Contrast with Absolute assign- which must be added to a fire insurance
(property) policy. (See Commercial multiple
ment.
peril policy)

COLLISION COVERAGE

Portion of an auto insurance policy that cov- COMMERCIAL MULTIPLE
ers the damage to the policyholder’s car from PERIL POLICY
Package policy that includes property,
a collision.
boiler and machinery, crime and general
COMBINED RATIO
liability coverages.
Percentage of each premium dollar a propCOMMERCIAL PAPER
erty/casualty insurer spends on claims and
Short-term, unsecured and, usually,
expenses. A decrease in the combined ratio
discounted promissory note issued by
means financial results are improving; an
commercial firms and financial companies
increase means they are deteriorating.
often to finance current business. ComCOMMERCIAL AUTOMOBILE
mercial paper, which is rated by debt rating
INSURANCE
agencies, is sold through dealers or directly
Provides coverage for vehicles that are used
placed with an investor.
primarily in connection with commercial
establishments or business activities. While
the major coverages are the same, commercial auto policies differs from a personal auto

88

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

COMMISSION
Fee paid to an agent or insurance salesperson as a percentage of the policy premium.
The percentage varies widely depending on
coverage, the insurer, and the marketing
methods.

COMPLETED OPERATIONS
COVERAGE
Pays for bodily injury or property damage
caused by a completed project or job. Protects a business that sells a service against
liability claims.

COMMUNITY RATING LAWS

COMPREHENSIVE COVERAGE

Enacted in several states on health insurance policies. Insurers are required to accept all applicants for coverage and charge
all applicants the same premium for the
same coverage regardless of age or health.
Premiums are based on the rate determined
by the geographic region’s health and
demographic profile.

Portion of an auto insurance policy that
covers damage to the policyholder’s car
not involving a collision with another car
(including damage from fire, explosions,
earthquakes, floods and riots), and theft.

 COMMUTATIVE CONTRACT
An agreement under which the contracting parties specify the values that they will
exchange; moreover, the parties generally
exchange items or services that they think
are of relatively equal value. Contrast with
Aleatory contract.

COMPULSORY AUTO INSURANCE
The minimum amount of auto liability
insurance that meets a state law. Financial
responsibility laws in every state require all
automobile drivers to show proof, after an
accident, of their ability to pay damages up
to the state minimum. In compulsory liability states this proof, which is usually in
the form of an insurance policy, is required
before you can legally drive a car.

 CONTESTABLE PERIOD

COMPETITIVE
REPLACEMENT PARTS
See Crash parts; Generic auto parts.

COMPETITIVE STATE FUND
A facility established by a state to sell
workers compensation in competition with
private insurers.

COMPLAINT RATIO
A measure used by some state insurance
departments to track consumer complaints
against insurance companies. Generally,
it is stated as the number of complaints
upheld against an insurance company, as a
percentage of premiums written. In some
states, complaints from medical providers
over the promptness of payments may also
be included.

	

The time during which an insurer has the
right to cancel or rescind an insurance
policy if the application contained a material misrepresentation. (See Incontestability
provision)

 CONTINGENT BENEFICIARY
The party designated to receive the proceeds of a life insurance policy following
the insured’s death if the primary beneficiary predeceased the insured. Also known
as secondary beneficiary and successor
beneficiary. (See Primary beneficiary)

CONTINGENT LIABILITY
Liability of individuals, corporations, or
partnerships for accidents caused by people
other than employees for whose acts or
omissions the corporations or partnerships
are responsible.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	89

 
Glossary

 CONVERTIBLE TERM
INSURANCE POLICY
A term life insurance policy that gives
the policy owner the right to convert the
policy to a permanent plan of insurance.

COVERAGE
Synonym for insurance.

CRASH PARTS
Sheet metal parts that are most often damaged in a car crash. (See Generic auto parts)

CREDIT
The promise to pay in the future in order to
buy or borrow in the present. The right to
defer payment of debt.

CREDIT DERIVATIVES
A contract that enables a user, such as a
bank, to better manage its credit risk. A
way of transferring credit risk to another
party.

CREDIT ENHANCEMENT
A technique to lower the interest payments
on a bond by raising the issue’s credit rating, often through insurance in the form
of a financial guarantee or with standby
letters of credit issued by a bank.

CREDIT INSURANCE
Commercial coverage against losses resulting from the failure of business debtors to
pay their obligation to the insured, usually
due to insolvency. The coverage is geared
to manufacturers, wholesalers and service
providers who may be dependent on a few
accounts and therefore could lose significant income in the event of an insolvency.

CREDIT LIFE INSURANCE
Life insurance coverage on a borrower
designed to repay the balance of a loan in
the event the borrower dies before the loan
is repaid. It may also include disablement

and can be offered as an option in connection with credit cards and auto loans.

CREDIT RATING
See Bond rating.

CREDIT SCORE
The number produced by an analysis of an
individual’s credit history. The use of credit
information affects all consumers in many
ways, including getting a job, finding a
place to live, securing a loan, getting telephone service and buying insurance. Credit
history is routinely reviewed by insurers
before issuing a commercial policy because
businesses in poor financial condition
tend to cut back on safety, which can lead
to more accidents and more claims. Auto
and home insurers may use information
in a credit history to produce an insurance
score. Insurance scores may be used in
underwriting and rating insurance policies.
(See Insurance score)

CRIME INSURANCE
Term referring to property coverages for the
perils of burglary, theft and robbery.

 CRITICAL ILLNESS (CI) INSURANCE
A type of individual health insurance that
pays a lump-sum benefit when the insured
is diagnosed with a specified illness. Also
known as critical diagnosis insurance.
Contrast with Specified disease coverage.

CROP-HAIL INSURANCE
Protection against damage to growing
crops from hail, fire or lightning provided
by the private market. By contrast, multiple
peril crop insurance covers a wider range of
yield reducing conditions, such as drought
and insect infestation, and is subsidized by
the federal government.

 CURRENT ASSUMPTION
WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE
See Interest-sensitive insurance.

90

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

D

DEFERRED ANNUITY

 DEATH BENEFIT
(1) For a life insurance contract, the
amount of money paid by an insurer to a
beneficiary when a person insured under
the life insurance policy dies. (2) For an annuity contract, the amount of money paid
to a beneficiary if the contract owner dies
before the annuity payments begin.

DECLARATION
Part of a property or liability insurance
policy that states the name and address of
policyholder, property insured, its location and description, the policy period,
premiums and supplemental information.
Referred to as the “dec page.”

 DECLINED RISK CLASS
In insurance underwriting, the group of
proposed insureds whose impairments or
anticipated extra mortality are so great
that an insurer cannot provide insurance
coverage to them at an affordable cost. Also
known as uninsurable class. Contrast with
Preferred risk class, Standard risk class and
Substandard risk class.

An annuity contract, also referred to as an
investment annuity, that is purchased either with a single tax-deferred premium or
with periodic tax-deferred premiums over
time. Payments begin at a predetermined
point in time, such as retirement. Money
contributed to such an annuity is intended
primarily to grow tax-deferred for future
use.

DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN
A retirement plan under which pension
benefits are fixed in advance by a formula
based generally on years of service to the
company multiplied by a specific percentage of wages, usually average earnings over
that period or highest average earnings
over the final years with the company.

DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN
An employee benefit plan under which the
employer sets up benefit accounts and contributions are made to it by the employer
and by the employee. The employer usually
matches the employee’s contribution up to
a stated limit.

DEMAND DEPOSIT

 DECREASING TERM
LIFE INSURANCE
Term life insurance that provides a death
benefit that decreases in amount over the
policy term. Contrast with Increasing term
life insurance.

DEDUCTIBLE
The amount of loss paid by the policyholder. Either a specified dollar amount,
a percentage of the claim amount, or a
specified amount of time that must elapse
before benefits are paid. The bigger the
deductible, the lower the premium charged
for the same coverage.

	

Customer assets that are held in a checking
account. Funds can be readily withdrawn
by check, “on demand.”

DEMUTUALIZATION
The conversion of insurance companies
from mutual companies owned by their
policyholders into publicly traded stock
companies.

DEPENDENT LIFE INSURANCE
See Family benefit coverage.

DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION
Financial institutions that obtain their
funds mainly through deposits from the
public. They include commercial banks,

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	91

 
Glossary

savings and loan associations, savings
banks and credit unions.

DEREGULATION
In insurance, reducing regulatory control
over insurance rates and forms. Commercial insurance for businesses of a certain
size has been deregulated in many states.

DERIVATIVES
Contracts that derive their value from an
underlying financial asset, such as publicly
traded securities and foreign currencies.
Often used as a hedge against changes in
value.

DIFFERENCE IN CONDITIONS
Policy designed to fill in gaps in a business’s commercial property insurance
coverage. There is no standard policy. Policies are specifically tailored to the policyholder’s needs.

DIMINUTION OF VALUE
The idea that a vehicle loses value after
it has been damaged in an accident and
repaired.

predominately direct writers or agency companies, are increasingly using many different
channels to sell insurance. In reinsurance,
denotes reinsurers that deal directly with the
insurance companies they reinsure without
using a broker.

DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
LIABILITY INSURANCE/D&O
Directors and officers liability insurance
(D&O) covers directors and officers of a
company for negligent acts or omissions
and for misleading statements that result
in suits against the company. There are a
variety of D&O coverages. Corporate reimbursement coverage indemnifies directors
and officers of the organization. Side-A coverage provides D&O coverage for personal
liability when directors and officers are not
indemnified by the firm. Entity coverage,
for claims made specifically against the
company, is also available. D&O policies
may be broadened to include coverage for
employment practices liability.

 DISABILITY

Property/casualty premiums collected by
the insurer from policyholders, before reinsurance premiums are deducted. Insurers
share some direct premiums and the risk
involved with their reinsurers.

In disability insurance, the inability of an
insured person to work due to an injury or
sickness. Each disability policy has a definition of disability that must be satisfied in
order for the insured to receive the policy’s
benefits. (See Residual disability; Total disability)

DIRECT SALES/DIRECT RESPONSE

 DISABILITY INCOME INSURANCE

DIRECT PREMIUMS

Method of selling insurance directly to the
insured through an insurance company’s
own employees, through the mail, by telephone or via the Internet. This is in lieu of
using captive or exclusive agents.

DIRECT WRITERS
Insurance companies that sell directly to the
public using exclusive agents or their own
employees, through the mail, by telephone
or via the Internet. Large insurers, whether
92

A type of health insurance designed to
compensate an insured person for a portion
of the income lost because of a disabling
injury or illness. Benefit payments are
made either weekly or monthly for a specified period during the continuance of an
insured’s disability. (See Income protection
insurance)

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

 DIVIDEND ACCUMULATIONS
OPTION

EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE

See Accumulation at interest option.

DIVIDENDS
Money returned to policyholders from an
insurance company’s earnings. Considered
a partial premium refund rather than a
taxable distribution, reflecting the difference between the premium charged and
actual losses. Many life insurance policies
and some property/casualty policies pay
dividends to their owners. Life insurance
policies that pay dividends are called participating policies.

DOMESTIC INSURANCE COMPANY
Term used by a state to refer to any company incorporated there.

 DOUBLE INDEMNITY BENEFIT
An accidental death benefit that is equal to
the face amount of a life insurance policy’s
basic death benefit and is paid when the
insured’s death is the result of an accident
as defined in the policy. (See Accidental
death benefit/ADB)

DREAD DISEASE COVERAGE

Covers a building and its contents, but
includes a large percentage deductible on
each. A special policy or endorsement exists because earthquakes are not covered
by standard homeowners or most business
policies.

ECONOMIC LOSS
Total financial loss resulting from the death
or disability of a wage earner, or from the
destruction of property. Includes the loss
of earnings, medical expenses, funeral
expenses, the cost of restoring or replacing
property and legal expenses. It does not
include noneconomic losses, such as pain
caused by an injury.

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE/
E-COMMERCE
The sale of products such as insurance over
the Internet.

ELIMINATION PERIOD
A kind of deductible or waiting period
usually found in disability policies. It is
counted in days from the beginning of the
illness or injury.

See Specified disease coverage.

EMPLOYEE DISHONESTY COVERAGE

E

Covers direct losses and damage to businesses resulting from the dishonest acts of
employees. (See Fidelity bond)

EARLY WARNING SYSTEM
A system of measuring insurers’ financial
stability set up by insurance industry regulators. An example is the Insurance Regulatory Information System (IRIS), which uses
financial ratios to identify insurers in need
of regulatory attention.

EARNED PREMIUM
The portion of premium that applies to the
expired part of the policy period. Insurance
premiums are payable in advance but the
insurance company does not fully earn
them until the policy period expires.
	

EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME
SECURITY ACT/ERISA
Federal legislation that protects employees
by establishing minimum standards for
private pension and welfare plans.

EMPLOYER’S LIABILITY
Part B of the workers compensation policy
that provides coverage for lawsuits filed
by injured employees who, under certain
circumstances, can sue under common law.
(See Exclusive remedy)

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	93

 
Glossary

EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
LIABILITY COVERAGE

ERRORS AND OMISSIONS
COVERAGE/E&O

Liability insurance for employers that covers wrongful termination, discrimination
and other violations of employees’ legal
rights.

A professional liability policy covering the
policyholder for negligent acts and omissions that may harm his or her clients.

ENDORSEMENT

Funds that a lender collects to pay monthly
premiums in mortgage and homeowners
insurance, and sometimes to pay property
taxes.

A written form attached to an insurance
policy that alters the policy’s coverage,
terms, or conditions. Sometimes called a
rider.

 ENDOWMENT INSURANCE
Life insurance that provides a policy benefit payable either when the insured dies or
on a stated date if the insured is still alive
on that date.

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPAIRMENT
LIABILITY COVERAGE
A form of insurance designed to cover
losses and liabilities arising from damage to
property caused by pollution.

ESCROW ACCOUNT

EXCESS AND SURPLUS LINES
Property/casualty coverage that isn’t available from insurers licensed by the state
(called admitted insurers) and must be purchased from a nonadmitted carrier.

EXCESS OF LOSS REINSURANCE
A contract between an insurer and a
reinsurer, whereby the insurer agrees to
pay a specified portion of a claim and the
reinsurer to pay all or a part of the claim
above that amount.

EQUITY

EXCLUSION

In investments, the ownership interest of
shareholders. In a corporation, stocks as
opposed to bonds.

A provision in an insurance policy that
eliminates coverage for certain risks, people,
property classes, or locations.

EQUITY INDEXED ANNUITY

EXCLUSIVE AGENT

Nontraditional fixed annuity. The specified
rate of interest guarantees a fixed minimum rate of interest like traditional fixed
annuities. At the same time, additional
interest may be credited to policy values
based upon positive changes, if any, in
an established index such as the S&P 500.
The amount of additional interest depends
upon the particular design of the policy.
They are sold by licensed insurance agents
and regulated by state insurance departments.

A captive agent, or a person who represents only one insurance company and is
restricted by agreement from submitting
business to any other company unless it is
first rejected by the agent’s company. (See
Captive agent)

94

EXCLUSIVE REMEDY
Part of the social contract that forms the
basis for workers compensation statutes
under which employers are responsible for
work-related injury and disease, regardless
of whether it was the employee’s fault and
in return the injured employee gives up the
right to sue when the employer’s negligence causes the harm.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

F

EXPENSE RATIO
Percentage of each premium dollar that
goes to insurers’ expenses including overhead, marketing and commissions.

For definitions of 401(k) Plan,
403(b) Plan, and 529 Savings Plans,

EXPERIENCE

 FACE AMOUNT

Record of losses.

For a fixed-amount whole life insurance
policy, the amount of the death benefit
payable if the insured person dies while the
policy is in force.

EXPOSURE
Possibility of loss.

EXTENDED COVERAGE
An endorsement added to an insurance
policy, or clause within a policy, that
provides additional coverage for risks other
than those in a basic policy.

EXTENDED REPLACEMENT
COST COVERAGE
Pays a certain amount above the policy
limit to replace a damaged home, generally 120 percent or 125 percent. Similar
to a guaranteed replacement cost policy,
which has no percentage limits. Most
homeowner policy limits track inflation in
building costs. Guaranteed and extended
replacement cost policies are designed to
protect the policyholder after a major disaster when the high demand for building
contractors and materials can push up the
normal cost of reconstruction. (See Guaranteed replacement cost coverage)

 EXTENDED TERM
INSURANCE OPTION
One of several nonforfeiture options included in life insurance policies that allows
the owner of a policy with a cash value to
discontinue premium payments and to use
the policy’s net cash value to purchase term
insurance for the full coverage amount provided under the original policy for as long
a term as the net cash value can provide.
(See Nonforfeiture options)

	

see page 78.

FACULTATIVE REINSURANCE
A reinsurance policy that provides an
insurer with coverage for specific individual risks that are unusual or so large
that they aren’t covered in the insurance
company’s reinsurance treaties. This can
include policies for jumbo jets or oil rigs.
Reinsurers have no obligation to take on
facultative reinsurance, but can assess each
risk individually. By contrast, under treaty
reinsurance, the reinsurer agrees to assume
a certain percentage of entire classes of
business, such as various kinds of auto, up
to preset limits.

FAIR ACCESS TO INSURANCE
REQUIREMENTS PLANS/
FAIR PLANS
Insurance pools that sell property insurance to people who can’t buy it in the
voluntary market because of high risk over
which they may have no control. FAIR
Plans, which exist in 28 states and the
District of Columbia, insure fire, vandalism, riot and windstorm losses, and some
sell homeowners insurance which includes
liability. Plans vary by state, but all require
property insurers licensed in a state to participate in the pool and share in the profits
and losses. (See Residual market)

 FAMILY BENEFIT COVERAGE
A type of supplementary benefit rider
offered in conjunction with a life insurance policy that insures the lives of the

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	95

 
Glossary

insured’s spouse and children. Also known
as dependent life insurance and spouse and
children’s insurance rider.

that guarantees the performance of their
responsibilities.

FARMOWNERS-RANCHOWNERS
INSURANCE

Legal responsibility of a fiduciary to safeguard assets of beneficiaries. A fiduciary,
for example a pension fund manager, is
required to manage investments held in
trust in the best interest of beneficiaries. Fiduciary liability insurance covers breaches
of fiduciary duty such as misstatements or
misleading statements, errors and omissions.

Package policy that protects the policyholder against named perils and liabilities
and usually covers homes and their contents, along with barns, stables and other
structures.

FEDERAL FUNDS
Reserve balances that depository institutions lend each other, usually on an
overnight basis. In addition, Federal funds
include certain other kinds of borrowing
by depository institutions from each other
and from federal agencies.

FEDERAL INSURANCE
ADMINISTRATION/FIA
Federal agency in charge of administering
the National Flood Insurance Program. It
does not regulate the insurance industry.

FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD
Seven member board that supervises the
banking system by issuing regulations
controlling bank holding companies and
federal laws over the banking industry. It
also controls and oversees the U.S. monetary system and credit supply.

FIDELITY BOND
A form of protection that covers policyholders for losses that they incur as a result
of fraudulent acts by specified individuals. It usually insures a business for losses
caused by the dishonest acts of its employees.

FIDUCIARY BOND
A type of surety bond, sometimes called a
probate bond, which is required of certain
fiduciaries, such as executors and trustees,

96

FIDUCIARY LIABILITY

FILE-AND-USE STATES
States where insurers must file rate changes
with their regulators, but don’t have to
wait for approval to put them into effect.

FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
INSURANCE
Covers losses from specific financial transactions and guarantees that investors in
debt instruments, such as municipal bonds,
receive timely payment of principal and
interest if there is a default. Raises the
credit rating of debt to which the guarantee
is attached. Investment bankers who sell
asset-backed securities, securities backed
by loan portfolios, use this insurance to
enhance marketability. (See Municipal bond
insurance)

FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW
A state law requiring that all automobile
drivers show proof that they can pay damages up to a minimum amount if involved
in an auto accident. Varies from state to
state but can be met by carrying a minimum amount of auto liability insurance.
(See Compulsory auto insurance)

FINITE RISK REINSURANCE
Contract under which the ultimate liability of the reinsurer is capped and on
which anticipated investment income is
expressly acknowledged as an underwrit-

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

ing component. Also known as financial
reinsurance because this type of coverage is
often bought to improve the balance sheet
effects of statutory accounting principles.

FIRE INSURANCE
Coverage protecting property against losses
caused by a fire or lightning that is usually
included in homeowners or commercial
multiple peril policies.

FIRST-PARTY COVERAGE
Coverage for the policyholder’s own property or person. In no-fault auto insurance
it pays for the cost of injuries. In no-fault
states with the broadest coverage, the
personal injury protection (PIP) part of the
policy pays for medical care, lost income,
funeral expenses and, where the injured
person is not able to provide services such
as child care, for substitute services. (See
No-fault; Third-party coverage)

FIXED ANNUITY
An annuity that guarantees a specific rate
of return. In the case of a deferred annuity,
a minimum rate of interest is guaranteed
during the savings phase. During the payment phase, a fixed amount of income,
paid on a regular schedule, is guaranteed.

 FLEXIBLE PREMIUM
A premium payment method sometimes
offered in connection with annuities and
with some types of life insurance that allows the contract owner or policy owner to
alter the amount and the frequency of payments, within specified boundaries defined
by the insurer and the law.

FLOATER
Attached to a homeowners policy, a floater
insures movable property, covering losses
wherever they may occur. Among the items
often insured with a floater are expensive
jewelry, musical instruments and furs. It
	

provides broader coverage than a regular
homeowners policy for these items.

FLOOD INSURANCE
Coverage for flood damage is available
from the federal government under the National Flood Insurance Program but is sold
by licensed insurance agents. Flood coverage is excluded under homeowners policies
and many commercial property policies.
However, flood damage is covered under
the comprehensive portion of an auto insurance policy. (See Adverse selection)

FORCED PLACE INSURANCE
Insurance purchased by a bank or creditor
on an uninsured debtor’s behalf so if the
property is damaged, funding is available
to repair it.

FOREIGN INSURANCE COMPANY
Name given to an insurance company
based in one state by the other states in
which it does business.

FRAUD
Intentional lying or concealment by policyholders to obtain payment of an insurance
claim that would otherwise not be paid, or
lying or misrepresentation by the insurance
company managers, employees, agents and
brokers for financial gain.

 FRATERNAL BENEFIT SOCIETY
See Fraternal insurer.

 FRATERNAL INSURER
A nonprofit organization that is operated
solely for the benefit of its members and
that provides its members with social and
insurance benefits. Also known as fraternal
benefit society.

FREE-LOOK PERIOD
A period of up to one month during which
the purchaser of an annuity can cancel the

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	97

 
Glossary

contract with no penalty. Rules vary by
state.

FREQUENCY
Number of times a loss occurs. One of the
criteria used in calculating premium rates.

FRONTING
A procedure in which a primary insurer
acts as the insurer of record by issuing a
policy, but then passes the entire risk to
a reinsurer in exchange for a commission.
Often, the fronting insurer is licensed to
do business in a state or country where the
risk is located, but the reinsurer is not. The
reinsurer in this scenario is often a captive
or an independent insurance company that
cannot sell insurance directly in a particular country.

FUTURES
Agreement to buy a security for a set price
at a certain date. Futures contracts usually
involve commodities, indexes or financial
futures.

GENERALLY ACCEPTED
ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES/GAAP
Generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) accounting is used in financial
statements that publicly held companies
prepare for the Securities and Exchange
Commission. (See Statutory accounting
principles/SAP)

GENERIC AUTO PARTS
Auto crash parts produced by firms that
are not associated with car manufacturers.
Insurers consider these parts, when certified, at least as good as those that come
from the original equipment manufacturer
(OEM). They are often cheaper than the
identical part produced by the OEM. (See
Crash parts; Aftermarket parts; Competitive replacement parts; Original equipment
manufacturer parts/OEM)

GLASS INSURANCE

G

Coverage for glass breakage caused by all
risks; fire and war are sometimes excluded.
Insurance can be bought for windows,
structural glass, leaded glass and mirrors.
Available with or without a deductible.

GAP INSURANCE

 GRACE PERIOD

An automobile insurance option, available
in some states, that covers the difference
between a car’s actual cash value when it is
stolen or wrecked and the amount the consumer owes the leasing or finance company.
Mainly used for leased cars. (See Actual cash
value)

(1) For insurance premium payments, a
specified length of time following a premium due date within which the renewal
premium may be paid without penalty.
The length of the grace period is specified
in a grace period provision that is found
in a life insurance, health insurance, or
annuity policy. (2) For purchases made on
credit, a period of time between the date of
a purchase and the date the lender begins
to charge interest during which no interest
accrues.

 GENERAL ACCOUNT
An undivided investment account in which
insurers maintain funds that support
contractual obligations for guaranteed
insurance products such as whole life insurance or fixed-rate annuities. Contrast with
Separate account.

98

 GRADED PREMIUM POLICY
A type of modified-premium whole life
policy that calls for three or more levels
of annual premium payment amounts,

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

increasing at specified points in time—such
as every three years—until reaching the
amount to be paid as a level premium for
the rest of the life of the policy.

GRADUATED DRIVER LICENSES
Licenses for younger drivers that allow
them to improve their skills. Regulations
vary by state, but often restrict nighttime
driving. Young drivers receive a learner’s
permit, followed by a provisional license,
before they can receive a standard driver’s
license.

GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT
Financial services legislation, passed by
Congress in 1999, that removed Depression
era prohibitions against the combination
of commercial banking and investment
banking activities. It allows insurance
companies, banks and securities firms to
engage in each others’ activities and own
one another.

 GROSS ANNUITY COST
A monetary amount equal to the present
value of future periodic income payments
under an annuity contract, calculated on
a gross basis, with a specific provision for
expense loading. Contrast with Net annuity
cost.

GROUP INSURANCE
A single policy covering a group of individuals, usually employees of the same
company or members of the same association and their dependents. Coverage
occurs under a master policy issued to the
employer or association.

GUARANTEE PERIOD
Period during which the level of interest
specified under a fixed annuity is guaranteed.

	

GUARANTEED DEATH BENEFIT
Basic death benefits guaranteed under variable annuity contracts.

GUARANTEED INCOME
CONTRACT/GIC
Often an option in an employer-sponsored
retirement savings plan. Contract between
an insurance company and the plan that
guarantees a stated rate of return on invested capital over the life of the contract.

 GUARANTEED INSURABILITY
(GI) BENEFIT
A supplementary life insurance policy
benefit often provided through a policy
rider that gives the policy owner the right
to purchase additional insurance of the
same type as the life insurance policy that
provides the GI benefit on specified option
dates. Also known as guaranteed insurability option (GIO).

GUARANTEED LIVING BENEFIT
A guarantee in a variable annuity that a
certain level of annuity payment will be
maintained. Serves as a protection against
investment risks. Several types exists.

 GUARANTEED RENEWABLE POLICY
An individual health insurance policy that
requires the insurer to renew the policy—as
long as premium payments are made—at
least until the insured attains a specified
age. The insurer can change premium rates
for broad classes of insureds but not for an
individual insured. Contrast with Noncancellable and Guaranteed renewable policy.

GUARANTEED REPLACEMENT
COST COVERAGE
Homeowners policy that pays the full
cost of replacing or repairing a damaged
or destroyed home, even if it is above the
policy limit. (See Extended replacement
cost coverage)

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	99

 
Glossary

GUARANTY FUND
The mechanism by which solvent insurers ensure that some of the policyholder
and third-party claims against insurance
companies that fail are paid. Such funds are
required in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, but the type and
amount of claim covered by the fund varies
from state to state. Some states pay policyholders’ unearned premiums—the portion
of the premium for which no coverage was
provided because the company was insolvent. Some have deductibles. Most states
have no limits on workers compensation
payments. Guaranty funds are supported
by assessments on insurers doing business
in the state.

GUN LIABILITY
A legal concept that holds gun manufacturers liable for the cost of injuries caused
by guns. Several cities have filed lawsuits
based on this concept.

H
HACKER INSURANCE
A coverage that protects businesses engaged
in electronic commerce from losses caused
by hackers.

HARD MARKET
A seller’s market in which insurance is expensive and in short supply. (See Property/
casualty insurance cycle)

HOMEOWNERS INSURANCE POLICY
The typical homeowners insurance
policy covers the house, the garage and
other structures on the property, as well
as personal possessions inside the house
such as furniture, appliances and clothing,
against a wide variety of perils including
windstorms, fire and theft. The extent of
the perils covered depends on the type of
policy. An all-risk policy offers the broad-

est coverage. This covers all perils except
those specifically excluded in the policy.
Homeowners insurance also covers additional living expenses. Known as Loss of
Use, this provision in the policy reimburses
the policyholder for the extra cost of living
elsewhere while the house is being restored
after a disaster. The liability portion of the
policy covers the homeowner for accidental injuries caused to third parties and/
or their property, such as a guest slipping
and falling down improperly maintained
stairs. Coverage for flood and earthquake
damage is excluded and must be purchased
separately. (See Flood insurance; Earthquake
insurance)

HOUSE YEAR
Equal to 365 days of insured coverage for a
single dwelling. It is the standard measurement for homeowners insurance.

HURRICANE DEDUCTIBLE
A percentage or dollar amount added to a
home-owners insurance policy to limit an
insurer’s exposure to loss from a hurricane.
Higher deductibles are instituted in higher
risk areas, such as coastal regions. Specific
details, such as the intensity of the storm
necessary for the deductible to be triggered
and the extent of the high risk area, vary
from insurer to insurer and state to state.

HYBRID ANNUITY
An annuity with features of both fixed and
variable annuities. (See Fixed annuity; variable annuity)

I
IDENTITY THEFT INSURANCE
Coverage for expenses incurred as the result of an identity theft. Can include costs
for notarizing fraud affidavits and certified
mail, lost income from time taken off from
work to meet with law enforcement person-

100 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

nel or credit agencies, fees for reapplying
for loans and attorney’s fees to defend
against lawsuits and remove criminal or
civil judgments.

IMMEDIATE ANNUITY
A product purchased with a lump sum,
usually at the time retirement begins or
afterwards. Payments begin within about
a year. Immediate annuities can be either
fixed or variable.

 INCOME DATE
The date on which an insurer begins or is
scheduled to begin making annuity benefit
payments under an annuity contract. Also
known as maturity date and annuity date.

 INCOME PROTECTION INSURANCE
A type of disability income coverage that
provides an income benefit both, while the
insured is totally disabled and unable to
work and while he is able to work, but because of a disability, is earning less than he
earned before being disabled. Also known
as residual disability insurance.

 INCONTESTABILITY PROVISION
An insurance and annuity policy provision that limits the time within which an
insurer has the right to avoid the contract
on the ground of material misrepresentation in the application for the policy.
Also known as incontestable clause. (See
Contestable period; Time limit on certain
defenses provision)

 INCREASING TERM
LIFE INSURANCE
A type of term life insurance that provides
a death benefit that increases by some
specified amount or percentage at stated
intervals over the policy term. Contrast with
Decreasing term life insurance.

	

INCURRED BUT NOT
REPORTED LOSSES/IBNR
Losses that are not filed with the insurer
or reinsurer until years after the policy is
sold. Some liability claims may be filed
long after the event that caused the injury
to occur. Asbestos-related diseases, for example, do not show up until decades after
the exposure. IBNR also refers to estimates
made about claims already reported but
where the full extent of the injury is not
yet known, such as a workers compensation claim where the degree to which workrelated injuries prevents a worker from
earning what he or she earned before the
injury unfolds over time. Insurance companies regularly adjust reserves for such losses
as new information becomes available.

INCURRED LOSSES
Losses occurring within a fixed period,
whether or not adjusted or paid during the
same period.

INDEMNIFY
Provide financial compensation for losses.

INDEPENDENT AGENT
Agent who is self-employed, is paid on
commission, and represents several insurance companies. (See Captive agent)

 INDETERMINATE PREMIUM
LIFE INSURANCE POLICY
A type of nonparticipating whole life policy
that specifies two premium rates—both a
maximum guaranteed rate and a lower rate.
The insurer charges the lower premium rate
when the policy is purchased and guarantees that rate for at least a stated period of
time, after which the insurer uses its actual
mortality, interest, and expense experience
to establish a new premium rate that may
be higher or lower than the previous premium rate. Also known as nonguaranteed

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	101

 
Glossary

premium life insurance policy and variable
premium life insurance policy.

INDEXED LIFE INSURANCE
CONTRACT
An arrangement similar to a universal life
contract. Death benefit amounts are based
on the amount selected by the policyholder
plus the account value. The policyholder’s
account value is linked to cumulative returns based on the S&P 500 index or some
other tied index. An essential component
of the contract is that the cash surrender
value is also linked to a tied index. Typically, the tied index doesn’t include dividends.
There may be additional constraints on the
amount that the insurance company will
credit as interest under this policy.

INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT
ACCOUNT/IRA
A tax-deductible savings plan for those
who are self-employed, or those whose
earnings are below a certain level or whose
employers do not offer retirement plans.
Others may make limited contributions on
a tax-deferred basis. The Roth IRA, a special
kind of retirement account created in 1997,
may offer greater tax benefits to certain
individuals.

INFLATION GUARD CLAUSE
A provision added to a homeowners insurance policy that automatically adjusts the
coverage limit on the dwelling each time
the policy is renewed to reflect current
construction costs.

INLAND MARINE INSURANCE
This broad type of coverage was developed
for shipments that do not involve ocean
transport. Covers articles in transit by all
forms of land and air transportation as
well as bridges, tunnels and other means of
transportation and communication. Floaters that cover expensive personal items

such as fine art and jewelry are included in
this category. (See Floater)

INSOLVENCY
Insurer’s inability to pay debts. Insurance
insolvency standards and the regulatory actions taken vary from state to state. When
regulators deem an insurance company is
in danger of becoming insolvent, they can
take one of three actions: place a company
in conservatorship or rehabilitation, if the
company can be saved, or in liquidation, if
salvage is deemed impossible. The difference between the first two options is one
of degree—regulators guide companies in
conservatorship but direct those in rehabilitation. Typically the first sign of problems
is inability to pass the financial tests regulators administer as a routine procedure. (See
Liquidation; Risk-based capital)

INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR
An organization such as a bank or insurance company that buys and sells large
quantities of securities.

 INSURABLE INTEREST
In insurance, a person exhibits an insurable
interest in a potential loss if that person
will suffer a genuine economic loss if the
event insured against occurs. Without the
presence of insurable interest, an insurance
contract is not formed for a lawful purpose
and, thus, is not a valid contract.

INSURABLE RISK
Risks for which it is relatively easy to get
insurance and that meet certain criteria.
These include being definable, accidental
in nature, and part of a group of similar
risks large enough to make losses predictable. The insurance company also must be
able to come up with a reasonable price for
the insurance.

102 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

INSURANCE
A system to make large financial losses
more affordable by pooling the risks of
many individuals and business entities
and transferring them to an insurance
company or other large group in return for
a premium.

INSURANCE POOL
A group of insurance companies that pools
its assets, enabling them to provide an
amount of insurance substantially more
than can be provided by individual companies to ensure large risks such as nuclear
power stations. Pools may be formed
voluntarily or mandated by the state to
insure risks that cannot be covered in the
voluntary market such as coastal properties
subject to hurricanes. (See Beach and windstorm plans; Fair access to insurance requirements plans/FAIR plans; Joint underwriting
association/JUA)

INSURANCE REGULATORY
INFORMATION SYSTEM/IRIS
Uses financial ratios to measure insurers’ financial strength. Developed by the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Each individual state insurance
department chooses how to use IRIS.

sibly also tend to drive a car responsibly.
Some insurance companies use insurance
scores as an insurance underwriting and
rating tool.

INSURANCE-TO-VALUE
Insurance written in an amount approximating the value of the insured property.

INTEGRATED BENEFITS
Coverage where the distinction between
job-related and non-occupational illnesses
or injuries is eliminated and workers compensation and general health coverage are
combined. Legal obstacles exist, however,
because the two coverages are administered
separately. Previously called twenty-four
hour coverage.

 INTEREST-ADJUSTED COST
COMPARISON INDEX
A cost comparison index used to compare life insurance policy costs that takes
into account the time value of money. By
comparing the index numbers derived for
similar life insurance policies, a consumer
has some basis on which to compare the
costs of the policies. (See Net payment cost
comparison index; Surrender cost comparison index)

 INTEREST-SENSITIVE INSURANCE

INSURANCE SCORE
Insurance scores are confidential rankings
based on credit information. This includes
whether the consumer has made timely
payments on loans, the number of open
credit card accounts and whether a bankruptcy filing has been made. An insurance
score is a measure of how well consumers manage their financial affairs, not of
their financial assets. It does not include
information about income or race. Studies
have shown that people who manage their
money well tend also to manage their most
important asset, their home, well. And
people who manage their money respon	

A general category of insurance products
in which the face amount and/or the cash
value vary according to the insurer’s investment earnings.

INTERMEDIATION
The process of bringing savers, investors
and borrowers together so that savers and
investors can obtain a return on their
money and borrowers can use the money
to finance their purchases or projects
through loans.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	103

 
Glossary

An insurer that sells exclusively via the
Internet.

surance and various commercial coverages,
such as medical malpractice. (See Assigned
risk plans; Residual market)

INTERNET LIABILITY INSURANCE

JUNK BONDS

Coverage designed to protect businesses
from liabilities that arise from the conducting of business over the Internet, including
copyright infringement, defamation and
violation of privacy.

Income generated by the investment of
assets. Insurers have two sources of income,
underwriting (premiums less claims and expenses) and investment income. The latter
can offset underwriting operations, which
are frequently unprofitable.

Corporate bonds with credit ratings of BB
or less. They pay a higher yield than investment grade bonds because issuers have
a higher perceived risk of default. Such
bonds involve market risk that could force
investors, including insurers, to sell the
bonds when their value is low. Most states
place limits on insurers’ investments in
these bonds. In general, because property/
casualty insurers can be called upon to
provide huge sums of money immediately
after a disaster, their investments must be
liquid. Less than 2 percent are in real estate
and a similarly small percent are in junk
bonds.

 IRREVOCABLE BENEFICIARY

JOINT AND SURVIVOR ANNUITY

INTERNET INSURER

INVESTMENT ANNUITY
See Deferred annuity.

INVESTMENT INCOME

A life insurance policy beneficiary who has
a vested interest in the policy proceeds even
during the insured’s lifetime because the
policy owner has the right to change the
beneficiary designation only after obtaining the beneficiary’s consent. Contrast with
Revocable beneficiary.

J
JOINT AND SURVIVOR ANNUITY
An annuity with two annuitants, usually
spouses. Payments continue until the death
of the longest living of the two.

JOINT UNDERWRITING
ASSOCIATION/JUA
Insurers that join together to provide
coverage for a particular type of risk or size
of exposure, when there are difficulties in
obtaining coverage in the regular market,
and which share in the profits and losses
associated with the program. JUAs may be
set up to provide auto and homeowners in-

An annuity with two annuitants, usually
spouses. Payments continue until the death
of the longest living of the two.

K
KEY PERSON INSURANCE
Insurance on the life or health of a key individual whose services are essential to the
continuing success of a business and whose
death or disability could cause the firm a
substantial financial loss.

KIDNAP/RANSOM INSURANCE
Coverage up to specific limits for the cost
of ransom or extortion payments and
related expenses. Often bought by international corporations to cover employees.
Most policies have large deductibles and
may exclude certain geographic areas.
Some policies require that the policyholder
not reveal the existence of the coverage.

104 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

L
L-SHARE VARIABLE ANNUITIES
A form of variable annuity contract usually
with short surrender periods and higher
mortality and expense risk charges.

LADDERING
A technique that consists of staggering the
maturity dates and the mix of different
types of bonds.

 LAPSE
The termination of an insurance policy
because a renewal premium is not paid by
the end of the grace period.

LAW OF LARGE NUMBERS
The theory of probability on which the
business of insurance is based. Simply put,
this mathematical premise says that the
larger the group of units insured, such as
sport-utility vehicles, the more accurate the
predictions of loss will be.

 LEVEL PREMIUM POLICIES
Premiums paid for a life insurance policy
or for a deferred annuity that remain the
same each year that the contract is in force.
Contrast with Modified premium policies
and Single premium policies.

LIABILITY INSURANCE
Insurance for what the policyholder is
legally obligated to pay because of bodily
injury or property damage caused to another person.

 LIFE ANNUITY
A type of annuity contract that guarantees
periodic income payments throughout
the lifetime of a named individual—the
annuitant. If a life annuity provides no
further benefits after the death of the annuitant, the annuity is known as a straight
life annuity. However, some life annuities
provide that income payments will be
	

paid either for the life of the annuitant or
for a guaranteed period—life income with
period certain—or at least until a guaranteed amount has been paid—life income
with refund annuity. (See Life annuity with
period certain; Life income with refund annuity; Straight life annuity)

 LIFE ANNUITY WITH
PERIOD CERTAIN
A type of annuity contract that guarantees
periodic income payments throughout
the lifetime of a named individual—the
annuitant—and guarantees that the payments will continue for at least a specified
period. If the annuitant dies before the end
of that specified period, the payments will
continue to be paid until the end of the
period to a beneficiary designated by the
annuitant. (See Life annuity)

 LIFE INCOME WITH
REFUND ANNUITY
A type of annuity contract that guarantees specified periodic income payments
throughout the lifetime of a named individual—the annuitant—and guarantees
that a refund will be made if the annuitant
dies before the total of the periodic payments made equals the amount paid for
the annuity. Also known as refund annuity.
(See Life annuity)

LIFE INSURANCE
Protection against the death of a policyholder in the form of a payment to a beneficiary. (See Ordinary life insurance; Term
insurance; Variable life insurance; Whole
life insurance)

LIMITED PAYMENT LIFE INSURANCE
Life insurance policy with premiums that
are fully paid up within a stated period of
time, such as 20 years.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	105

 
Glossary

LIMITS
Maximum amount of insurance that can be
paid for a covered loss.

LINE
Type or kind of insurance.

LIQUIDATION
Enables the state insurance department as
liquidator or its appointed deputy to wind
up the insurance company’s affairs by selling its assets and settling claims upon those
assets. After receiving the liquidation order,
the liquidator notifies insurance departments in other states and state guaranty
funds of the liquidation proceedings. Such
insurance company liquidations are not
subject to the Federal Bankruptcy Code but
to each state’s liquidation statutes.

LIQUIDITY
The ability and speed with which a security
can be converted into cash.

LIQUOR LIABILITY
Coverage for bodily injury or property
damage caused by an intoxicated person
who was served liquor by the policyholder.

LIVING BENEFIT RIDER
An addition to a policy that enables early
payout of anticipated death benefits. The
rider affords terminally ill policyholders an
additional source of funds to pay medical
bills and maintain their lifestyle.

LLOYD’S OF LONDON
A marketplace where underwriting syndicates, or mini-insurers, gather to sell insurance policies and reinsurance. Each syndicate is managed by an underwriter who
decides whether or not to accept the risk.
The Lloyd’s market is a major player in the
international reinsurance market as well as
a primary market for marine insurance and
large risks. Originally, Lloyd’s was a London
coffee house in the 1600s patronized by

shipowners who insured each other’s hulls
and cargoes. As Lloyd’s developed, wealthy
individuals, called “Names,” placed their
personal assets behind insurance risks as
a business venture. Increasingly since the
1990s, most of the capital comes from
corporations.

LLOYDS
Corporation formed to market services of a
group of underwriters. Does not issue insurance policies or provide insurance protection. Insurance is written by individual
underwriters, with each assuming a part of
every risk. Has no connection to Lloyd’s of
London, and is found primarily in Texas.

LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE
Long-term care (LTC) insurance pays for
services to help individuals who are unable
to perform certain activities of daily living
without assistance, or require supervision
due to a cognitive impairment such as
Alzheimer’s disease. LTC is available as individual insurance or through an employersponsored or association plan.

 LONG-TERM DISABILITY
INCOME INSURANCE
A type of disability income insurance that
provides disability income benefits after
short-term disability income benefits terminate and continues until the earlier of the
date when the insured person returns to
work, dies, or becomes eligible for pension
benefits. Contrast with Short-term disability
income insurance.

LOSS
A reduction in the quality or value of a
property, or a legal liability.

LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES
The sum insurers pay for investigating and
settling insurance claims, including the
cost of defending a lawsuit in court.

106 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

LOSS COSTS

MANUAL

The portion of an insurance rate used to
cover claims and the costs of adjusting
claims. Insurance companies typically
determine their rates by estimating their
future loss costs and adding a provision for
expenses, profit and contingencies.

A book published by an insurance or bonding company or a rating association or
bureau that gives rates, classifications and
underwriting rules.

LOSS OF USE
A provision in homeowners and renters
insurance policies that reimburses policyholders for any extra living expenses due to
having to live elsewhere while their home
is being restored following a disaster.

LOSS RATIO
Percentage of each premium dollar an
insurer spends on claims.

LOSS RESERVES
The company’s best estimate of what it
will pay for claims, which is periodically
readjusted. They represent a liability on the
insurer’s balance sheet.

M
MALPRACTICE INSURANCE
Professional liability coverage for physicians, lawyers, and other specialists against
suits alleging negligence or errors and
omissions that have harmed clients.

MARINE INSURANCE
Coverage for goods in transit, and for the
commercial vehicles that transport them,
on water and over land. The term may
apply to inland marine but more generally
applies to ocean marine insurance. Covers
damage or destruction of a ship’s hull and
cargo and perils include collision, sinking,
capsizing, being stranded, fire, piracy and
jettisoning cargo to save other property.
Wear and tear, dampness, mold, and war
are not included. (See Inland marine; Ocean
marine)

 MATURITY DATE
(1) For endowment in insurance, the date
on which an insurer will pay the face
amount of an endowment policy to the
policy owner if the insured is still living.
(2) In investing, the date on which a bond
issuer must repay to the bondholder the
amount originally borrowed. (3) For an annuity, the date on which the insurer begins
to make annuity payments. Also known as
income date.

McCARRAN-FERGUSON ACT

MANAGED CARE
Arrangement between an employer or
insurer and selected providers to provide
comprehensive health care at a discount to
members of the insured group and coordinate the financing and delivery of health
care. Managed care uses medical protocols
and procedures agreed on by the medical
profession to be cost effective, also known
as medical practice guidelines.

Federal law signed in 1945 in which Congress declared that states would continue
to regulate the insurance business. Grants
insurers a limited exemption from federal
antitrust legislation.

MEDIATION
Nonbinding procedure in which a third
party attempts to resolve a conflict between
two other parties.

MEDICAID
A federal/state public assistance program
created in 1965 and administered by
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	107

 
Glossary

the states for people whose income and
resources are insufficient to pay for health
care.

 MEDICAL INFORMATION BUREAU
See MIB, Inc.

MEDICAL MALPRACTICE
INSURANCE
See Malpractice insurance.

MEDICAL PAYMENTS INSURANCE
A coverage in which the insurer agrees to
reimburse the insured and others up to a
certain limit for medical or funeral expenses as a result of bodily injury or death
by accident. Payments are without regard
to fault.

MEDICAL UTILIZATION REVIEW
The practice used by insurance companies
to review claims for medical treatment.

MEDICARE
Federal program for people 65 or older that
pays part of the costs associated with hospitalization, surgery, doctors’ bills, home
health care and skilled nursing care.

from standard homeowners policies, as are
other forms of earth movement.

 MISREPRESENTATION
A false or misleading statement. (1) In
insurance sales, a false or misleading statement made by a sales agent to induce a customer to purchase insurance is a prohibited
sales practice. (2) In insurance underwriting, a false or misleading statement by an
insurance applicant may provide a basis for
the insurer to avoid the policy.

 MISSTATEMENT OF AGE
OR SEX PROVISION
A life insurance, health insurance, and annuity policy provision that describes how
policy benefits will be adjusted if the age
or sex of the insured has been misstated in
the insurance application. Typically, the
benefits payable will be those that the premiums paid would have purchased for the
correct age or sex.

 MODIFIED PREMIUM POLICIES

 MIB, INC.

An insurance policy for which the policy
owner first pays a lower premium than she
would for a similar level premium policy
for a specified initial period and then pays
a higher premium than she would for a
similar level premium policy. Contrast with
Level premium policies and Single premium policies.

A nonprofit organization established to
provide information to insurers about
impairments that applicants have admitted to, or that other insurers have detected,
in connection with previous applications
for insurance. Formerly known as Medical
Information Bureau.

Total supply of money in the economy,
composed of currency in circulation and
deposits in savings and checking accounts.
By changing the interest rates the Federal
Reserve seeks to adjust the money supply
to maintain a strong economy.

MINE SUBSIDENCE COVERAGE

 MORAL HAZARD

MEDIGAP/MEDSUP
Policies that supplement federal insurance
benefits particularly for those covered
under Medicare.

An endorsement to a homeowners insurance policy, available in some states, for
losses to a home caused by the land under
a house sinking into a mine shaft. Excluded

MONEY SUPPLY

The possibility that a person may act dishonestly in an insurance transaction.

108 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

 MORBIDITY RATE

MULTIPLE PERIL POLICY

The rate at which sickness and injury occur
within a defined group of people. Insurers
base health insurance premiums in part on
the morbidity rate for a proposed insured’s
age group. Contrast with Mortality rate.

A package policy, such as a homeowners
or business insurance policy, that provides
coverage against several different perils. It
also refers to the combination of property
and liability coverage in one policy. In the
early days of insurance, coverages for property damage and liability were purchased
separately.

MORTALITY AND EXPENSE
(M&E) RISK CHARGE
A fee that covers such annuity contract
guarantees as death benefits.

 MORTALITY RATE
A percentage rate at which death occurs
among a defined group of people of a
specified age and sometimes of a specified
gender. Insurers base the premiums for life
insurance in part on the mortality rate for a
proposed insured’s age group. Contrast with
Morbidity rate.

MORTGAGE GUARANTEE
INSURANCE
Coverage for the mortgagee (usually a
financial institution) in the event that a
mortgage holder defaults on a loan. Also
called private mortgage insurance (PMI).

MORTGAGE INSURANCE
A form of decreasing term insurance that
covers the life of a person taking out a
mortgage. Death benefits provide for payment of the outstanding balance of the
loan. Coverage is in decreasing term insurance, so the amount of coverage decreases
as the debt decreases. A variant, mortgage
unemployment insurance pays the mortgage of a policyholder who becomes involuntarily unemployed. (See Term insurance)

MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
Investment grade securities backed by a
pool of mortgages. The issuer uses the cash
flow from mortgages to pay interest on the
bonds.

	

MUNICIPAL BOND INSURANCE
Coverage that guarantees bondholders
timely payment of interest and principal
even if the issuer of the bonds defaults.
Offered by insurance companies with high
credit ratings, the coverage raises the credit
rating of a municipality offering the bond
to that of the insurance company. It allows
a municipality to raise money at lower
interest rates. A form of financial guarantee
insurance. (See Financial guarantee insurance)

MUNICIPAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
Liability insurance for governments and
government agencies. Coverages range
from general liability to public officials errors and omissions to environment liability.

MUTUAL HOLDING COMPANY
An organizational structure that provides
mutual companies with the organizational
and capital raising advantages of stock
insurers, while retaining the policyholder
ownership of the mutual.

MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY
A company owned by its policyholders that
returns part of its profits to the policyholders as dividends. The insurer uses the rest
as a surplus cushion in case of large and
unexpected losses.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	109

 
Glossary

N

NO-FAULT MEDICAL

NAMED PERIL

A type of accident coverage in homeowners
policies.

Peril specifically mentioned as covered in
an insurance policy.

NATIONAL FLOOD
INSURANCE PROGRAM
Federal government-sponsored program
under which flood insurance is sold to
homeowners and businesses. (See Adverse
selection; Flood insurance)

NEGLIGENCE
A failure to exercise the legally required
degree of care of others, resulting in harm
or damage.

 NET ANNUITY COST
A monetary amount equal to the present
value of future periodic payments under an
annuity contract, calculated on a net basis,
without any specific provision for expense
loading. Contrast with Gross annuity cost.
(See Annuity cost)

 NET PAYMENT COST
COMPARISON INDEX
A cost comparison index used to compare
life insurance policies that takes into account the time value of money and that
measures the cost of a policy over a 10- or
20-year period assuming the policy owner
pays premiums over the entire period. Contrast with Surrender cost comparison index.

NET PREMIUMS WRITTEN
See Premiums written.

NO-FAULT
Auto insurance coverage that pays for each
driver’s own injuries, regardless of who
caused the accident. No-fault varies from
state to state. It also refers to an auto liability insurance system that restricts lawsuits
to serious cases. Such policies are designed
to promote faster reimbursement and to
reduce litigation.

NO-PAY, NO-PLAY
The idea that people who don’t buy coverage should not receive benefits. Prohibits
uninsured drivers from collecting damages
from insured drivers. In most states with
this law, uninsured drivers may not sue for
noneconomic damages such as pain and
suffering. In other states, uninsured drivers
are required to pay the equivalent of a large
deductible ($10,000) before they can sue
for property damages and another large
deductible before they can sue for bodily
harm.

NONADMITTED ASSETS
Assets that are not included on the balance
sheet of an insurance company, including furniture, fixtures, past-due accounts
receivable, and agents’ debt balances. (See
Assets)

NONADMITTED INSURER
Insurers licensed in some states, but not
others. States where an insurer is not
licensed call that insurer nonadmitted.
They sell coverage that is unavailable from
licensed insurers within the state.

 NONCANCELLABLE AND
GUARANTEED RENEWABLE POLICY
An individual health insurance policy,
which stipulates that, until the insured
reaches a specified age (usually age 65), the
insurer will not cancel the coverage, increase the premiums, or change the policy
provisions as long as the premiums are paid
when due. Also known as noncancellable
policy. Contrast with Guaranteed renewable
policy.

 NONFORFEITURE OPTIONS
The various ways in which a contract
owner may apply the cash surrender value

110 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

of an insurance or an annuity contract if
the contract lapses. In the United States,
the typical nonforfeiture options for life
insurance are the cash payment option, the
extended term insurance option and the reduced paid-up insurance option. (See Cash
payment option; Cash surrender value;
Extended term insurance option; Reduced
paid-up insurance option)

NONFORFEITURE VALUES
The benefits, as printed in a life insurance
policy, that the insurance guarantees to the
insured if the insured stops paying premiums.

NOTICE OF LOSS
A written notice required by insurance
companies immediately after an accident
or other loss. Part of the standard provisions defining a policyholder’s responsibilities after a loss.

NUCLEAR INSURANCE
Covers operators of nuclear reactors and
other facilities for liability and property
damage in the case of a nuclear accident
and involves both private insurers and the
federal government.

OCEAN MARINE INSURANCE
Coverage of all types of vessels and watercraft, for property damage to the vessel and
cargo, including such risks as piracy and
the jettisoning of cargo to save other property. Coverage for marine-related liabilities.
War is excluded from basic policies, but can
be bought back.

OPEN COMPETITION STATES
States where insurance companies can set
new rates without prior approval, although
the state’s commissioner can disallow them
if they are not reasonable and adequate or
are discriminatory.

OPERATING EXPENSES
The cost of maintaining a business’s property, includes insurance, property taxes,
utilities and rent, but excludes income tax,
depreciation and other financing expenses.

OPTIONS
Contracts that allow, but do not oblige, the
buying or selling of property or assets at a
certain date at a set price.

ORDINANCE OR LAW COVERAGE

NURSING HOME INSURANCE
A form of long-term care policy that covers
a policyholder’s stay in a nursing facility.

O
OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE
Abnormal condition or illness caused by
factors associated with the workplace. Like
occupational injuries, this is covered by
workers compensation policies. (See Workers compensation)

OCCURRENCE POLICY
Insurance that pays claims arising out of
incidents that occur during the policy term,
	

even if they are filed many years later. (See
Claims made policy)

Endorsement to a property policy, including homeowners, that pays for the extra
expense of rebuilding to comply with
ordinances or laws, often building codes,
that did not exist when the building was
originally built. For example, a building
severely damaged in a hurricane may have
to be elevated above the flood line when it
is rebuilt. This endorsement would cover
part of the additional cost.

ORDINARY LIFE INSURANCE
A life insurance policy that remains in force
for the policyholder’s lifetime.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	111

 
Glossary

ORIGINAL EQUIPMENT
MANUFACTURER PARTS/OEM
Sheet metal auto parts made by the manufacturer of the vehicle. (See Generic auto
parts)

PAY-AT-THE-PUMP
A system proposed in the 1990s in which
auto insurance premiums would be paid
to state governments through a per-gallon
surcharge on gasoline.

OVER-THE-COUNTER/OTC

PAY-AS-YOU-DRIVE (PAYD)

Security that is not listed or traded on
an exchange such as the New York Stock
Exchange. Business in over-the-counter securities is conducted through dealers using
electronic networks.

An auto insurance product whose pricing
takes into account the number of miles
driven by the policyholder.

P
PACKAGE POLICY
A single insurance policy that combines
several coverages previously sold separately.
Examples include homeowners insurance
and commercial multiple peril insurance.

 PAID-UP ADDITIONAL
INSURANCE OPTION
An option, available to the owners of
participating life insurance policies, that
allows the policy owner to use policy
dividends to purchase additional insurance
on the insured’s life; the paid-up additional
insurance is issued on the same plan as the
basic policy and in whatever face amount
the dividend can provide at the insured’s
attained age. (See Dividend; Participating
policy; Policy dividend options)

 PAID-UP POLICY
An insurance policy that requires no further premium payments but continues to
provide coverage.

 PARTIAL DISABILITY
See Residual disability.

 PARTICIPATING POLICY
A type of insurance policy that allows
policy owners to receive policy dividends.
Also known as par policy. (See Dividend)

 PAYOUT OPTIONS
The methods available to an annuity
contract owner for the distribution of
the annuity’s accumulated value. (1) The
lump sum distribution method allows the
contract owner to receive the balance of his
account in a single payment. (2) The fixed
period option provides that the annuity’s
accumulated value will be paid out over
a specified period of time. (3) The fixedamount option provides that the annuity’s
accumulated value will be paid out in a
pre-selected payment amount until the accumulated value is exhausted. (4) A life annuity option provides that periodic income
payments will be tied in some manner to
the life expectancy of a named individual.
(See Life annuity)

PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY
CORPORATION
An independent federal government agency
that administers the Pension Plan Termination Insurance program to ensure that
vested benefits of employees whose pension plans are being terminated are paid
when they come due. Only defined benefit
plans are covered. Benefits are paid up to
certain limits.

PENSIONS
Programs to provide employees with retirement income after they meet minimum
age and service requirements. Life insurers hold some of these funds. Since the

112 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

1970s responsibility for funding retirement
has increasingly shifted from employers
(defined benefit plans that promise workers
a specific retirement income) to employees (defined contribution plans financed
by employees that may or may not be
matched by employer contributions). (See
Defined benefit plan; Defined contribution
plan)

 PERIOD CERTAIN

 PER CAPITA BENEFICIARY
DESIGNATION

PERSONAL INJURY PROTECTION
COVERAGE/PIP

The stated period over which an insurer
makes periodic benefit payments under an
annuity certain. (See Annuity certain)

PERSONAL ARTICLES FLOATER
A policy or an addition to a policy used to
cover personal valuables, like jewelry or
furs.

A type of life insurance policy beneficiary
designation in which the life insurance
benefits are divided equally among the
designated beneficiaries who survive the
insured. For example, if the policy specifies
two beneficiaries, but only one is surviving
at the time of the insured’s death, then the
remaining beneficiary receives the entire
policy benefit. Contrast with Per stirpes
beneficiary designation.

Portion of an auto insurance policy that
covers the treatment of injuries to the
driver and passengers of the policyholder’s
car.

 PER STIRPES BENEFICIARY
DESIGNATION

Health insurance policy that allows the
employee to choose between in-network
and out-of-network care each time medical
treatment is needed.

A type of life insurance policy beneficiary
designation in which the life insurance
benefits are divided among a class of
beneficiaries; for example, children of
the insured. The living members of the
class and the descendants of any deceased
members of the class share in the benefits
equally. Contrast with Per capita beneficiary
designation.

PERIL
A specific risk or cause of loss covered by
an insurance policy, such as a fire, windstorm, flood, or theft. A named-peril policy
covers the policyholder only for the risks
named in the policy in contrast to an allrisk policy, which covers all causes of loss
except those specifically excluded.

	

PERSONAL LINES
Property/casualty insurance products that
are designed for and bought by individuals, including homeowners and automobile
policies. (See Commercial lines)

POINT-OF-SERVICE PLAN

POLICY
A written contract for insurance between
an insurance company and a policyholder
stating details of coverage.

 POLICY DIVIDEND OPTIONS
Ways in which the owner of a participating insurance policy may receive policy
dividends. (See Additional term insurance
option; Cash dividend option; Dividend
accumulations option; Paid-up additional
insurance option; Premium reduction option)

POLICYHOLDERS’ SURPLUS
The amount of money remaining after an
insurer’s liabilities are subtracted from its
assets. It acts as a financial cushion above

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	113

 
Glossary

and beyond reserves, protecting policyholders against an unexpected or catastrophic situation.

POLITICAL RISK INSURANCE
Coverage for businesses operating abroad
against loss due to political upheaval
such as war, revolution, or confiscation of
property.

POLLUTION INSURANCE
Policies that cover property loss and liability arising from pollution-related damages,
for sites that have been inspected and
found uncontaminated. It is usually written on a claims-made basis so policies pay
only claims presented during the term of
the policy or within a specified time frame
after the policy expires. (See Claims made
policy)

POOL
See Insurance pool.

cantly lower than average likelihood of loss
within the context of the insurer’s underwriting practices. Contrast with Declined
risk class, Standard risk class and Substandard risk class.

PREMISES
The particular location of the property or a
portion of it as designated in an insurance
policy.

PREMIUM
The price of an insurance policy, typically
charged annually or semiannually. (See Direct premiums; Earned premium; Unearned
premium)

 PREMIUM REDUCTION OPTION
An option, available to the owners of
participating insurance policies, that allows the insurer to apply policy dividends
toward the payment of renewal premiums.
(See Dividend; Policy dividend options)

 PRE-EXISTING CONDITION

PREMIUM TAX

(1) According to most group health insurance policies, a condition for which an
individual received medical care during
the three months immediately prior to the
effective date of her coverage. (2) According to most individual health insurance
policies, an injury that occurred or a sickness that first appeared or manifested itself
within a specified period—usually two
years—before the policy was issued and
that was not disclosed on the application
for insurance.

A state tax on premiums paid by its
residents and businesses and collected by
insurers.

PREFERRED PROVIDER
ORGANIZATION
Network of medical providers which charge
on a fee-for-service basis, but are paid on a
negotiated, discounted fee schedule.

 PREFERRED RISK CLASS
In insurance underwriting, the group of
proposed insureds who represent a signifi-

PREMIUMS IN FORCE
The sum of the face amounts, plus dividend additions, of life insurance policies
outstanding at a given time.

PREMIUMS WRITTEN
The total premiums on all policies written
by an insurer during a specified period of
time, regardless of what portions have been
earned. Net premiums written are premiums written after reinsurance transactions.

 PRIMARY BENEFICIARY
The party designated to receive the proceeds of a life insurance policy following
the death of the insured. Also known as
first beneficiary. (See Contingent beneficiary)

114 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

PRIMARY COMPANY

PROOF OF LOSS

In a reinsurance transaction, the insurance
company that is reinsured.

Documents showing the insurance company that a loss occurred.

PRIMARY MARKET

PROPERTY/CASUALTY INSURANCE

Market for new issue securities where the
proceeds go directly to the issuer.

Covers damage to or loss of policyholders’
property and legal liability for damages
caused to other people or their property.
Property/casualty insurance, which includes auto, homeowners and commercial
insurance, is one segment of the insurance
industry. The other sector is life/health.
Outside the United States, property/casualty insurance is referred to as nonlife or
general insurance.

PRIME RATE
Interest rate that banks charge to their
most creditworthy customers. Banks set
this rate according to their cost of funds
and market forces.

PRIOR APPROVAL STATES
States where insurance companies must file
proposed rate changes with state regulators,
and gain approval before they can go into
effect.

PRIVATE MORTGAGE INSURANCE
See Mortgage guarantee insurance.

PRIVATE PLACEMENT
Securities that are not registered with the
Securities and Exchange Commission and
are sold directly to investors.

PRODUCT LIABILITY
A section of tort law that determines who
may sue and who may be sued for damages
when a defective product injures someone.
No uniform federal laws guide manufacturer’s liability, but under strict liability, the
injured party can hold the manufacturer
responsible for damages without the need
to prove negligence or fault.

PRODUCT LIABILITY INSURANCE

PROPERTY/CASUALTY
INSURANCE CYCLE
Industry business cycle with recurrent
periods of hard and soft market conditions. In the 1950s and 1960s, cycles were
regular with three year periods each of hard
and soft market conditions in almost all
lines of property/casualty insurance. Since
then they have been less regular and less
frequent.

PROPOSITION 103
A November 1988 California ballot
initiative that called for a statewide auto
insurance rate rollback and for rates to be
based more on driving records and less
on geographical location. The initiative
changed many aspects of the state’s insurance system and was the subject of lawsuits
for more than a decade.

PURCHASING GROUP

Protects manufacturers’ and distributors’
exposure to lawsuits by people who have
sustained bodily injury or property damage
through the use of the product.

An entity that offers insurance to groups of
similar businesses with similar exposures
to risk.

PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY
INSURANCE

A life insurance contract that pays a
periodic income benefit for the life of the
owner of the annuity. The payment can

Covers professionals for negligence and errors or omissions that injure their clients.
	

PURE ENDOWMENT

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	115

 
Glossary

be monthly, quarterly, semiannually or
annually.

PURE LIFE ANNUITY
A form of annuity that ends payments
when the annuitant dies. Payments may be
fixed or variable.

Q
QUALIFIED ANNUITY
A form of annuity purchased with pretax
dollars as part of a retirement plan that
benefits from special tax treatment, such as
a 401(k) plan.

R
RATE
The cost of a unit of insurance, usually per
$1,000. Rates are based on historical loss
experience for similar risks and may be
regulated by state insurance offices.

RATE REGULATION
The process by which states monitor insurance companies’ rate changes, done either
through prior approval or open competition models. (See Open competition states;
Prior approval states)

 RATED POLICY
An insurance policy that is classified as
having a greater-than-average likelihood of
loss, usually issued with special exclusions,
a premium rate that is higher than the
rate for a standard policy, a reduced face
amount, or any combination of these.

RATING AGENCIES
There are several major credit agencies that
determine insurers’ financial strength and
viability to meet claims obligations. They
include A.M. Best Co.; Fitch, Inc.; Moody’s
Investors Services; Standard & Poor’s Corp.;
and Weiss Ratings, Inc. Factors considered

include company earnings, capital adequacy, operating leverage, liquidity, investment
performance, reinsurance programs, and
management ability, integrity and experience.

RATING BUREAU
The insurance business is based on the
spread of risk. The more widely risk is
spread, the more accurately loss can be
estimated. An insurance company can
more accurately estimate the probability of
loss on 100,000 homes than on ten. Years
ago, insurers were required to use standardized forms and rates developed by rating
agencies. Today, large insurers use their
own statistical loss data to develop rates.
But small insurers, or insurers focusing on
special lines of business, with insufficiently
broad loss data to make them actuarially reliable depend on pooled industry data collected by such organizations as ISO, which
provides information to help develop rates
such as estimates of future losses and loss
adjustment expenses like legal defense
costs.

REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS
Investments generally owned by life insurers that include commercial mortgage loans
and real property.

RECEIVABLES
Amounts owed to a business for goods or
services provided.

REDLINING
Literally means to draw a red line on a map
around areas to receive special treatment.
Refusal to issue insurance based solely on
where applicants live is illegal in all states.
Denial of insurance must be risk-based.

 REDUCED PAID-UP
INSURANCE OPTION
One of several nonforfeiture options included in life insurance policies that allows

116 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

the owner of a policy with cash values to
discontinue premium payments and to
use the policy’s net cash value to purchase
paid-up insurance of the same plan as the
original policy. (See Nonforfeiture options)

 REGISTERED PRINCIPAL
An officer or manager of a National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) member,
who is involved in the day-to-day operation of the securities business, has qualified
as a registered representative, and has an
NASD Series 24 or 26 registration.

 REGISTERED REPRESENTATIVE
A sales representative or other person who
has registered with the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), disclosed
the required background information, and
passed one or more NASD examination. A
registered representative engages in the
securities business on behalf of a NASD
member by soliciting the sale of securities
or training securities salespeople.

 REINSTATEMENT
The process by which an insurer puts back
into force an insurance policy that has
either been terminated for nonpayment of
premiums or continued as extended term
or reduced paid-up coverage.

REINSURANCE
Insurance bought by insurers. A reinsurer
assumes part of the risk and part of the
premium originally taken by the insurer,
known as the primary company. Reinsurance effectively increases an insurer’s capital and therefore its capacity to sell more
coverage. The business is global and some
of the largest reinsurers are based abroad.
Reinsurers have their own reinsurers, called
retrocessionaires. Reinsurers don’t pay policyholder claims. Instead, they reimburse
insurers for claims paid. (See Treaty reinsurance; Facultative reinsurance)
	

RELATION OF EARNINGS TO
INSURANCE CLAUSE
A clause included in some individual disability policies that limits the amount of
benefits that an insurer will pay when the
total amount of disability benefits from
all insurers exceeds the individual’s usual
earnings.

 RENEWABLE TERM
INSURANCE POLICY
A term life insurance policy that gives the
policy owner the option to continue the
coverage at the end of the specified term
without presenting evidence of insurability,
although typically at a higher premium
based on the insured’s attained age.

RENTERS INSURANCE
A form of insurance that covers a policyholder’s belongings against perils such
as fire, theft, windstorm, hail, explosion,
vandalism, riots, and others. It also provides
personal liability coverage for damage the
policyholder or dependents cause to third
parties. It also provides additional living
expenses, known as loss-of-use coverage,
if a policyholder must move while his or
her dwelling is repaired. It also can include
coverage for property improvements. Possessions can be covered for their replacement
cost or for their actual cash value, which
includes depreciation.

REPLACEMENT COST
Insurance that pays the dollar amount
needed to replace damaged personal
property or dwelling property without
deducting for depreciation but limited by
the maximum dollar amount shown on the
declarations page of the policy.

REPURCHASE AGREEMENT/‘REPO’
Agreement between a buyer and seller
where the seller agrees to repurchase the
securities at an agreed upon time and

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	117

 
Glossary

price. Repurchase agreements involving
U.S. government securities are utilized by
the Federal Reserve to control the money
supply.

Net income divided by total equity. Measures profitability by showing how efficiently invested capital is being used.

RESERVES

 REVOCABLE BENEFICIARY

A company’s best estimate of what it will
pay for claims.

A life insurance policy beneficiary whose
right to the policy’s proceeds can be cancelled or reduced by the policy owner at
any time before the insured’s death.
Contrast with Irrevocable beneficiary.

 RESIDUAL DISABILITY
In disability income insurance, a condition
in which the insured is not totally disabled,
but is still unable to function as before the
sickness or injury, and therefore suffers a
reduction in income of at least the percentage—typically 20 percent to 25 percent—
specified in the disability income plan. Also
known as partial disability.

 RESIDUAL DISABILITY INSURANCE
See Income protection insurance.

RESIDUAL MARKET
Facilities, such as assigned risk plans and
FAIR Plans, that exist to provide coverage
for those who cannot get it in the regular
market. Insurers doing business in a given
state generally must participate in these
pools. For this reason the residual market is
also known as the shared market.

RETENTION
The amount of risk retained by an insurance company that is not reinsured.

RETROCESSION
The reinsurance bought by reinsurers to
protect their financial stability.

RETROSPECTIVE RATING
A method of permitting the final premium
for a risk to be adjusted, subject to an
agreed upon maximum and minimum
limit based on actual loss experience. It is
available to large commercial insurance
buyers.

RETURN ON EQUITY

RIDER
An attachment to an insurance policy that
alters the policy’s coverage or terms.

RISK
The chance of loss or the person or entity
that is insured.

RISK MANAGEMENT
Management of the varied risks to which a
business firm or association might be subject. It includes analyzing all exposures to
gauge the likelihood of loss and choosing
options to better manage or minimize loss.
These options typically include reducing
and eliminating the risk with safety measures, buying insurance, and self-insurance.

RISK-RETENTION GROUPS
Businesses that band together to self-insure
and form an organization, which is chartered and licensed as an insurer in at least
one state, to handle liability insurance.

RISK-BASED CAPITAL
The need for insurance companies to
be capitalized according to the inherent
riskiness of the type of insurance they sell.
Higher risk types of insurance, liability as
opposed to property business, generally
necessitate higher levels of capital.

 ROLLOVER
A direct transfer of retirement funds from
one qualified plan to another plan of the

118 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

same type or to an individual retirement
arrangement (IRA) that does not pass
through the hands of the owner and thus
does not incur any tax liability for the
owner. Also known as direct rollover and
direct transfer.

S
SALVAGE
Damaged property an insurer takes over to
reduce its loss after paying a claim. Insurers receive salvage rights over property on
which they have paid claims, such as badly
damaged cars. Insurers that paid claims on
cargoes lost at sea now have the right to
recover sunken treasures. Salvage charges
are the costs associated with recovering
that property.

the Internal Revenue Service annually adjust these limits for cost-of-living increases.

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION/SEC
The organization that oversees publicly
held insurance companies. Those companies make periodic financial disclosures
to the SEC, including an annual financial
statement (or 10K) and a quarterly financial statement (or 10-Q). Companies must
also disclose any material events and other
information about their stock.

SECURITIES OUTSTANDING
Stock held by shareholders.

SECURITIZATION OF
INSURANCE RISK

A list of individual items or groups of items
that are covered under one policy or a
listing of specific benefits, charges, credits,
assets or other defined items.

Using the capital markets to expand and
diversify the assumption of insurance risk.
The issuance of bonds or notes to thirdparty investors directly or indirectly by an
insurance or reinsurance company or a
pooling entity as a means of raising money
to cover risks. (See Catastrophe bonds)

SECOND-TO-DIE LIFE INSURANCE

 SEGREGATED ACCOUNT

See Survivorship Life insurance.

In Canada, an investment account that
insurers maintain separately from a general
account to help manage the funds placed
in variable insurance products such as variable annuities. (See Separate account)

SCHEDULE

SECONDARY MARKET
Market for previously issued and outstanding securities.

 SECTION 1035 EXCHANGE
In the United States, a taxfree replacement
of an insurance policy for another insurance contract covering the same person
that is performed in accordance with the
conditions of Section 1035 of the Internal
Revenue Code.

SECTION 415
A section of the Internal Revenue Code that
provides for dollar limitations on benefits
and contributions under qualified retirement plans. Section 415 also requires that
	

SELF-INSURANCE
The concept of assuming a financial risk
oneself, instead of paying an insurance
company to take it on. Every policyholder
is a self-insurer in terms of paying a deductible and co-payments. Large firms often
self-insure frequent, small losses such as
damage to their fleet of vehicles or minor
workplace injuries. However, to protect
injured employees state laws set out requirements for the assumption of workers
compensation programs. Self-insurance
also refers to employers who assume all or

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	119

 
Glossary

part of the responsibility for paying the
health insurance claims of their employees.
Firms that self insure for health claims are
exempt from state insurance laws mandating the illnesses that group health insurers
must cover.

 SEPARATE ACCOUNT
In the United States, an investment account maintained separately from an insurer’s general account to help manage the
funds placed in variable insurance products
such as variable annuities. Contrast with
General account. (See Segregated account)

 SETTLEMENT OPTIONS
Choices given to the owner or beneficiary
of a life insurance policy regarding the
method by which the insurer will pay the
policy’s proceeds when the policy owner
does not receive the benefits in one single
payment. Typically, the owner can elect (1)
to leave the proceeds with the insurer and
earn a specified interest rate, (2) to have
the proceeds paid in a series of installments
for a pre-selected period, (3) to have the
proceeds paid in a pre-selected sum in a
series of installments for as long as the
proceeds last, or (4) to have the insurer tie
payment of the proceeds to the life expectancy of a named individual through a life
annuity. Also known as optional modes of
settlement. (See Life annuity)

SEVERITY
Size of a loss. One of the criteria used in
calculating premiums rates.

SEWER BACKUP COVERAGE
An optional part of homeowners insurance
that covers sewers.

SHARED MARKET
See Residual market.

 SHORT-TERM DISABILITY
INCOME INSURANCE
A type of disability income coverage that
provides disability income benefits for a
maximum benefit period of from one to
five years. Contrast with Long-term disability income insurance.

 SINGLE PREMIUM POLICIES
A type of life insurance or annuity contract
that is purchased by the payment of one
lump sum. (1) A single-premium deferred
annuity (SPDA) is an annuity contract
purchased with a single premium payment
whose periodic income payments generally do not begin until several years in the
future. (2) A single premium immediate annuity (SPIA) contract is an annuity contract
that is purchased with a single premium
payment and that will begin making periodic income payments one annuity period
after the contract’s issue date.

SOFT MARKET
An environment where insurance is plentiful and sold at a lower cost, also known
as a buyers’ market. (See Property/casualty
insurance cycle)

SOLVENCY
Insurance companies’ ability to pay the
claims of policyholders. Regulations to
promote solvency include minimum
capital and surplus requirements, statutory
accounting conventions, limits to insurance company investment and corporate
activities, financial ratio tests and financial
data disclosure.

SOLVENCY II
A collection of regulatory requirements
for insurance firms that operate in the
European Union, scheduled to take effect
in 2012.

120 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

 SPECIFIED DISEASE COVERAGE
A type of health insurance coverage that
provides benefits for the diagnosis and
treatment of a specifically named disease
or diseases, such as cancer. Also known as
dread disease coverage. Contrast with Critical illness (CI) insurance.

SPENDTHRIFT TRUST CLAUSE
Life insurance provision that protects policy payouts from the beneficiary’s creditors.

 SPLIT-DOLLAR LIFE
INSURANCE PLAN
An agreement under which a business provides individual life insurance policies for
certain employees, who share in paying the
cost of the policies.

SPREAD OF RISK
The selling of insurance in multiple areas
to multiple policyholders to minimize the
danger that all policyholders will have
losses at the same time. Companies are
more likely to insure perils that offer a
good spread of risk. Flood insurance is an
example of a poor spread of risk because
the people most likely to buy it are the
people close to rivers and other bodies of
water that flood. (See Adverse selection)

STACKING
Practice that increases the money available to pay auto liability claims. In states
where this practice is permitted by law,
courts may allow policyholders who have
several cars insured under a single policy,
or multiple vehicles insured under different policies, to add up the limit of liability
available for each vehicle.

 STANDARD RISK CLASS
In insurance underwriting, the group of
proposed insureds who represent average
risk within the context of the insurer’s

	

underwriting practices and therefore pay
average premiums in relation to others of
similar insurability. Contrast with Declined
risk class, Preferred risk class and Substandard risk class.

STATUTORY ACCOUNTING
PRINCIPLES/SAP
More conservative standards than under
GAAP accounting rules, they are imposed
by state laws that emphasize the present
solvency of insurance companies. SAP helps
ensure that the company will have sufficient
funds readily available to meet all anticipated insurance obligations by recognizing
liabilities earlier or at a higher value than
GAAP and assets later or at a lower value. For
example, SAP requires that selling expenses
be recorded immediately rather than amortized over the life of the policy. (See Admitted
assets; GAAP accounting)

STOCK INSURANCE COMPANY
An insurance company owned by its
stockholders who share in profits through
earnings distributions and increases in
stock value.

 STRAIGHT LIFE ANNUITY
A type of life annuity contract that provides periodic income payments for as long
as the annuitant lives but provides no benefit payments after the annuitant’s death.
(See Life annuity)

STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT
Legal agreement to pay a designated person,
usually someone who has been injured,
a specified sum of money in periodic
payments, usually for his or her lifetime,
instead of in a single lump sum payment.
(See Annuity)

SUBROGATION
The legal process by which an insurance
company, after paying a loss, seeks to re-

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	121

 
Glossary

cover the amount of the loss from another
party who is legally liable for it.

 SUBSTANDARD PREMIUM RATES
The premium rates charged insureds who
are classified as substandard risks. Also
known as special class rates.

 SUBSTANDARD RISK CLASS
In insurance underwriting, the group of
proposed insureds who represent a significantly greater-than-average likelihood of
loss within the context of the insurer’s underwriting practices. Also known as special
class risk. Contrast with Declined risk class,
Preferred risk class and Standard risk class.

 SUICIDE EXCLUSION PROVISION
A life insurance policy provision stating
that policy proceeds will not be paid if
the insured dies as the result of suicide as
defined within the policy within a specified
period following the date of policy issue.

SUPERFUND
A federal law enacted in 1980 to initiate
cleanup of the nation’s abandoned hazardous waste dump sites and to respond to
accidents that release hazardous substances
into the environment. The law is officially
called the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act.

 SUPPLEMENTAL COVERAGE
An amount of coverage that adds to the
amount of coverage specified in a basic
insurance policy.

SURETY BOND
A contract guaranteeing the performance
of a specific obligation. Simply put, it is a
three-party agreement under which one
party, the surety company, answers to a second party, the owner, creditor or “obligee,”
for a third party’s debts, default or nonperformance. Contractors are often required to
purchase surety bonds if they are working

on public projects. The surety company
becomes responsible for carrying out the
work or paying for the loss up to the bond
“penalty” if the contractor fails to perform.

SURPLUS
The remainder after an insurer’s liabilities
are subtracted from its assets. The financial
cushion that protects policyholders in case
of unexpectedly high claims. (See Capital;
Risk-based capital)

SURPLUS LINES
Property/casualty insurance coverage that
isn’t available from insurers licensed in the
state, called admitted companies, and must
be purchased from a nonadmitted carrier. Examples include risks of an unusual
nature that require greater flexibility in
policy terms and conditions than exist in
standard forms or where the highest rates
allowed by state regulators are considered
inadequate by admitted companies. Laws
governing surplus lines vary by state.

SURRENDER CHARGE
A charge for withdrawals from an annuity contract before a designated surrender
charge period, usually from five to seven
years.

 SURRENDER COST
COMPARISON INDEX
A cost comparison index, used to compare insurance policies, which takes into
account the time value of money and
measures the cost of a policy over a 10- or
20-year period assuming the policy owner
surrenders the policy for its cash value at
the end of the period. Contrast with Net
payment cost comparison index.

SURVIVORSHIP LIFE INSURANCE
A form of insurance that covers more than
one person and pays a benefit after all of
the insureds die. It can be used to help pay
estate taxes after the deaths of a husband

122 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

and wife or as a form of business continuation insurance. Also known as second-todie life insurance.

SWAPS
The simultaneous buying, selling or exchange of one security for another among
investors to change maturities in a bond
portfolio, for example, or because investment goals have changed.

The location of the insured may have a
considerable impact on the cost of losses.
The chance of an accident or theft is much
higher in an urban area than in a rural one,
for example.

TERRORISM INSURANCE

Accumulation of investment income on
which income taxes are not payable until
money is withdrawn from the investment
vehicle.

Included as a part of the package in standard commercial insurance policies before
September 11 virtually free of charge. Terrorism coverage is now generally offered
separately at a price that more adequately
reflects the risk. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) was created by Congress in
2002, and renewed for two years in December 2005, to provide a temporary backstop
for incurred losses resulting from certain
acts of terrorism.

 TAX SHELTERED ANNUITY (TSA)

THIRD-PARTY ADMINISTRATOR

T
 TAX-DEFERRED BASIS

In the United States, a retirement annuity
sold only to organizations offering qualified retirement plans under section 403(b)
of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. (See
403(b) plan)

 TEN-DAY FREE LOOK PROVISION
See Free-look period.

TERM CERTAIN ANNUITY
A form of annuity that pays out over a
fixed period rather than when the annuitant dies.

TERM INSURANCE
A form of life insurance that covers the insured person for a certain period of time, the
“term” that is specified in the policy. It pays
a benefit to a designated beneficiary only
when the insured dies within that specified
period which can be one, five, 10 or even 20
years. Term life policies are renewable but
premiums increase with age.

TERRITORIAL RATING
A method of classifying risks by geographic
location to set a fair price for coverage.
	

Outside group that performs clerical functions for an insurance company.

THIRD-PARTY COVERAGE
Liability coverage purchased by the policyholder as a protection against possible
lawsuits filed by a third party. The insured
and the insurer are the first and second
parties to the insurance contract. (See Firstparty coverage)

TIME DEPOSIT
Funds that are held in a savings account
for a predetermined period of time at a
set interest rate. Banks can refuse to allow
withdrawals from these accounts until the
period has expired or assess a penalty for
early withdrawals.

 TIME LIMIT ON CERTAIN
DEFENSES PROVISION
An individual health insurance policy
provision that limits the time during which
the insurer may contest the validity of the
contract on the ground of misrepresentation in the application or may reduce or
deny a claim on the ground it results from

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	123

 
Glossary

a preexisting condition. (See Incontestability provision)

TITLE INSURANCE
Insurance that indemnifies the owner of
real estate in the event that his or her clear
ownership of property is challenged by the
discovery of faults in the title.

TORT
A legal term denoting a wrongful act resulting in injury or damage on which a civil
court action, or legal proceeding, may be
based.

TORT LAW
The body of law governing negligence, intentional interference, and other wrongful acts
for which civil action can be brought, except
for breach of contract, which is covered by
contract law.

TORT REFORM
Refers to legislation designed to reduce
liability costs through limits on various
kinds of damages and through modification of liability rules.

 TOTAL DISABILITY
For disability insurance purposes, an
insured’s disability that meets the requirements of the definition of total disability
included in the disability insurance policy
or policy rider and that qualifies for payment of the specified disability benefits.
When a disability begins, total disability
is usually the complete and continuous
inability of an insured to perform the
essential duties of his regular occupation.
After a disability has existed for a specified
period, total disability usually exists only
if the insured is prevented from working at
any occupation for which he is reasonably
fitted by education, training or experience.
(See Disability; Residual disability)

TOTAL LOSS
The condition of an automobile or other
property when damage is so extensive that
repair costs would exceed the value of the
vehicle or property.

TRANSPARENCY
A term used to explain the way information
on financial matters, such as financial reports and actions of companies or markets,
are communicated so that they are easily
understood and frank.

TRAVEL INSURANCE
Insurance to cover problems associated
with traveling, generally including trip
cancellation due to illness, lost luggage and
other incidents.

TREASURY SECURITIES
Interest-bearing obligations of the U.S.
government issued by the Treasury as a
means of borrowing money to meet government expenditures not covered by tax
revenues. Marketable Treasury securities
fall into three categories—bills, notes and
bonds. Marketable Treasury obligations are
currently issued in book entry form only;
that is, the purchaser receives a statement,
rather than an engraved certificate.

TREATY REINSURANCE
A standing agreement between insurers
and reinsurers. Under a treaty each party
automatically accepts specific percentages
of the insurer’s business.

 TWISTING
An illegal insurance sales practice, in which
a sales agent misrepresents the features of
a contract in order to induce the contract
owner to replace his current contract, often
to the disadvantage of the contract owner.
(See Misrepresentation)

124 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

U

underwriting loss. Underwriting losses are
typically offset by investment income.

UMBRELLA POLICY
Coverage for losses above the limit of
an underlying policy or policies such as
homeowners and auto insurance. While it
applies to losses over the dollar amount in
the underlying policies, terms of coverage
are sometimes broader than those of underlying policies.

UNEARNED PREMIUM
The portion of a premium already received
by the insurer under which protection has
not yet been provided. The entire premium
is not earned until the policy period expires, even though premiums are typically
paid in advance.

UNBUNDLED CONTRACTS

UNINSURABLE RISK

A form of annuity contract that gives
purchasers the freedom to choose among
certain optional features in their contract.

Risks that do not meet the criteria of an
insurable risk. (See Insurable risk)

UNCLAIMED LIFE
INSURANCE BENEFITS

Portion of an auto insurance policy that
protects a policyholder from uninsured and
hit-and-run drivers.

Life insurance benefits that are unclaimed
and unpaid because the beneficiaries aren’t
aware that the policies exist or can’t locate
the policies because they don’t know which
insurance company wrote them. If an
insurance company knows that an insured
died and cannot find the beneficiary, the
money is transferred to the state where the
insured bought the policy.

UNDERINSURANCE
The result of the policyholder’s failure to
buy sufficient insurance. An underinsured
policyholder may only receive part of the
cost of replacing or repairing damaged
items covered in the policy.

UNINSURED MOTORISTS COVERAGE

UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE
A flexible premium policy that combines
protection against premature death with
a type of savings vehicle, known as a cash
value account, that typically earns a money
market rate of interest. Death benefits can
be changed during the life of the policy
within limits, generally subject to a medical examination. Once funds accumulate
in the cash value account, the premium
can be paid at any time but the policy will
lapse if there isn’t enough money to cover
annual mortality charges and administrative costs.

UNDERWRITING

UTILIZATION REVIEW

Examining, accepting, or rejecting insurance risks and classifying the ones that are
accepted, in order to charge appropriate
premiums.

See Medical utilization review.

V
VALUED POLICY

UNDERWRITING INCOME
The insurer’s profit on the insurance sale
after all expenses and losses have been
paid. When premiums aren’t sufficient to
cover claims and expenses, the result is an

	

A policy under which the insurer pays a
specified amount of money to or on behalf
of the insured upon the occurrence of a
defined loss. The money amount is not
related to the extent of the loss. Life insurance policies are an example.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	125

 
Glossary

VANDALISM

VOID

The malicious and often random destruction or spoilage of another person’s
property.

A policy contract that for some reason specified in the policy becomes free of all legal
effect. One example under which a policy
could be voided is when information a
policyholder provided is proven untrue.

VARIABLE ANNUITY
An annuity whose contract value or
income payments vary according to the
performance of the stocks, bonds and other
investments selected by the contract owner.

VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE
A policy that combines protection against
premature death with a savings account
that can be invested in stocks, bonds and
money market mutual funds at the policyholder’s discretion.

 VARIABLE PREMIUM LIFE
INSURANCE POLICY
See Indeterminate premium life insurance
policy.

VIATICAL SETTLEMENT COMPANIES
Insurance firms that buy life insurance policies at a steep discount from policyholders
who are often terminally ill and need the
payment for medications or treatments.
The companies provide early payouts to
the policyholder, assume the premium
payments, and collect the face value of the
policy upon the policyholder’s death.

 VARIABLE UNIVERSAL LIFE
(VUL) INSURANCE
A form of permanent life insurance that
combines the premium and death benefit
flexibility of universal life insurance with
the investment flexibility and risk of
variable life insurance. With this type of
policy, the death benefit and the cash
value fluctuate according to the contract’s
investment performance. Also known as
universal life II.

VOLATILITY
A measure of the degree of fluctuation in
a stock’s price. Volatility is exemplified by
large, frequent price swings up and down.

VOLCANO COVERAGE
Most homeowners policies cover damage
from a volcanic eruption.

VOLUME
Number of shares a stock trades either per
day or per week.

W
 WAITING PERIOD
For a health insurance policy, the period of
time that must pass from the date of policy
issue before benefits are payable to an
insured. Also known as elimination period
and probationary period.

WAIVER
The surrender of a right or privilege. In
life insurance, a provision that sets certain
conditions, such as disablement, which
allow coverage to remain in force without
payment of premiums.

 WAIVER OF PREMIUM FOR
DISABILITY (WP) BENEFIT
A supplementary life insurance policy or
annuity contract benefit under which the
insurer promises to give up its right to collect premiums that become due while the
insured is disabled according to the policy
or rider’s definition of disability.

126 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Glossary

WARRANTY INSURANCE

WORKERS COMPENSATION

Coverage that compensates consumers for
the cost of repairing or replacing defective
products past the normal warranty period
provided by manufacturers.

Insurance that pays for medical care and
physical rehabilitation of injured workers and helps to replace lost wages while
they are unable to work. State laws, which
vary significantly, govern the amount of
benefits paid and other compensation
provisions.

WAR RISK
Special coverage on cargo in overseas ships
against the risk of being confiscated by a
government in wartime. It is excluded from
standard ocean marine insurance and can
be purchased separately. It often excludes
cargo awaiting shipment on a wharf or on
ships after 15 days of arrival in port.

WATER-DAMAGE
INSURANCE COVERAGE
Protection provided in most homeowners insurance policies against sudden and
accidental water damage, from burst pipes
for example. Does not cover damage from
problems resulting from a lack of proper
maintenance such as dripping air conditioners. Water damage from floods is covered under separate flood insurance policies
issued by the federal government.
WEATHER	DERIVATIVE
An insurance or securities product used
as a hedge by energy-related businesses
and others whose sales tend to fluctuate
depending on the weather.

WEATHER INSURANCE
A type of business income insurance that
compensates for financial losses caused by
adverse weather conditions, such as constant rain on the day scheduled for a major
outdoor concert.

WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE
The oldest kind of cash value life insurance
that combines protection against premature death with a savings account. Premiums are fixed and guaranteed and remain
level throughout the policy’s lifetime.
	

WRAP-UP INSURANCE
Broad policy coordinated to cover liability
exposures for a large group of businesses
that have something in common. Might be
used to insure all businesses working on a
large construction project, such as an apartment complex.

WRITE
To insure, underwrite, or accept an application for insurance.

WRITTEN PREMIUMS
See Premiums written.

X
XXX Regulation
The National Association of Insurance
Commissioner’s current model valuation
law for life insurance policies, adopted
in March 1999. The law tells insurance
companies how much they should hold as
a reserve for each term life insurance policy.
The model has been adopted by most of
the states.

Y
 YEARLY RENEWABLE TERM
(YRT) INSURANCE
One-year term life insurance that is renewable at the end of the policy term. Also
known as annually renewable term (ART)
insurance. (See Term life insurance)

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	127

 
Glossary

s

orie
t
c
e
ir

D

Property/Casualty
Insurance Industry
Organizations
AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
NATIONAL OFFICE
2101 L Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20037
Tel: 202-828-7100
Fax: 202-293-1219
Web: www.aiadc.org
Trade and service organization for property/
casualty insurance companies. Provides a
forum for the discussion of problems as
well as safety, promotional and legislative
services.

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
MID-ATLANTIC REGION
2101 L Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20037
Tel: 202-828-7139
Fax: 202-293-1219
Web: www.aiadc.org

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
MIDWEST REGION
150 North Wacker Drive, Suite 2525
Chicago, IL 60606
Tel: 312-782-7720
Fax: 312-782-7718
Web: www.aiadc.org

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
NORTHEAST REGION (ALBANY)
95 Columbia Street
Albany, NY 12210
Tel: 518-462-1695
Fax: 518-465-6023
Web: www.aiadc.org

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
NORTHEAST REGION (BOSTON)
1 Walnut Street
Boston, MA 02108
Tel: 617-305-4155
Fax: 617-305-4154
Web: www.aiadc.org

128 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

deaths, injuries and property damage
resulting from natural hazards.

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
SOUTHEAST REGION

INSURANCE INFORMATION
INSTITUTE (I.I.I.)

5605 Glenridge Drive, Suite 845
Atlanta, GA 30342
Tel: 404-261-8834
Fax: 404-231-5780
Web: www.aiadc.org

110 William Street
New York, NY 10038
Tel: 212-346-5500
Fax: 212-732-1916
Web: www.iii.org
A primary source for information, analysis
and reference on insurance subjects.

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
SOUTHWEST REGION
500 West 13th Street
Austin, TX 78701
Tel: 512-322-3111
Fax: 512-322-3112
Web: www.aiadc.org

INSURANCE INFORMATION
INSTITUTE (I.I.I.)
Florida Representative Lynne McChristian
4775 E. Fowler Avenue
Tampa, Florida 33617
Tel: 813-480-6446
Fax: 813-915-3463
Web: www.InsuringFlorida.org

AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION (AIA) –
WESTERN REGION
915 L Street, Suite 1480
Sacramento, CA 95814
Tel: 916-442-7617
Fax: 916-422-8178
Web: www.aiadc.org

INSURANCE INFORMATION
NETWORK OF CALIFORNIA (IINC)

INDEPENDENT INSURANCE AGENTS
& BROKERS OF AMERICA, INC.
127 S. Peyton Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: 800-221-7917
Fax: 703-683-7556
Web: www.iiaba.org
Trade association of independent insurance
agents and brokers.

INSTITUTE FOR BUSINESS
& HOME SAFETY
4775 E. Fowler Avenue
Tampa, FL 33617
Tel: 813-286-3400
Fax: 813-286-9960
Web: www.ibhs.org
An insurance industry-sponsored nonprofit
organization dedicated to reducing losses,

	

3530 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 1610
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Tel: 213-624-4462
Web: www.iinc.org

INSURANCE RESEARCH COUNCIL
(A DIVISION OF THE AMERICAN
INSTITUTE FOR CPCU)
718 Providence Road, PO Box 3025
Malvern, PA 19355-0725
Tel: 610-644-2212
Fax: 610-640-5388
Web: www.ircweb.org
A division of the American Institute
for CPCU. Provides the public and the
insurance industry with timely research
information relevant to public policy issues
affecting risk and insurance.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	129

 
Directories

ISO
545 Washington Blvd.
Jersey City, NJ 07310-1686
Tel: 800-888-4476
Fax: 201-748-1472
Web: www.iso.com
Provider of products and services that help
measure, manage and reduce risk. Provides
data, analytics and decision-support
solutions to professionals in many fields,
including insurance, finance, real estate,
health services, government and human
resources.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE AND
FINANCIAL ADVISORS
2901 Telestar Court, PO Box 12012
Falls Church, VA 22042-1205
Tel: 703-770-8100
Web: www.naifa.org
Professional association representing health
and life insurance agents.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF MUTUAL INSURANCE
COMPANIES (NAMIC)
3601 Vincennes Rd., PO Box 68700
Indianapolis , IN 46268
Tel: 317-875-5250
Fax: 317-879-8408
Web: www.namic.org
Trade association of property/casualty
mutual insurance companies.

NAMIC – WASHINGTON, DC OFFICE
122 C Street, NW, Suite 540
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: 202-628-1558
Fax: 202-628-1601
Web: www.namic.org

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF PROFESSIONAL
INSURANCE AGENTS
400 N. Washington Street Alexandria,
Virginia 22314-2353
Tel: 703-836-9340
Fax: 703-836-1279
Web: www.pianet.com

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
PROFESSIONAL SURPLUS
LINES OFFICES, LTD.
200 N.E. 54th Street, Suite 200
Kansas City, MO 64118
Tel: 816-741-3910
Fax: 816-741-5409
Web: www.napslo.org
Professional association of wholesale
brokers, excess and surplus lines
companies, affiliates and supporting
members.

NATIONAL INSURANCE
CRIME BUREAU
1111 East Touhy, Suite 400
Des Plaines, IL 60018
Tel: 847-544-7085
Fax: 847-544-7101
Web: www.nicb.org
Not-for-profit organization dedicated to
combating crime and vehicle theft.

NCCI HOLDINGS, INC.
901 Peninsula Corporate Circle
Boca Raton, FL 33487
Tel: 561-893-1000
Fax: 561-893-1500
Web: www.ncci.com
Develops and administers rating plans
and systems for workers compensation
insurance.

130 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

NCCI, INC. – REGULATORY
SERVICES DIVISION

PCI – MASSACHUSETTS
(New England Region)

111 River Street, Suite 1202
Hoboken, NJ 07030
Tel: 201-222-0500
Fax: 201-222-8880
Web: www.ncci.com

One State Street, Suite 1500
Boston, MA 02109
Tel: 617-723-1976
Fax: 617-227-3590
Web: www.pciaa.net

PROPERTY CASUALTY INSURERS
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (PCI)

PCI – NEW JERSEY
(Northeastern Region)

2600 South River Road
Des Plaines, IL 60018-3286
Tel: 847-297-7800
Fax: 847-297-5064
Web: www.pciaa.net
Serves as a voice on public policy issues
and advocates positions that foster a
competitive market place for property/
casualty insurers and insurance consumers.

28 West State Street, Suite 719
Trenton, NJ 08608
Tel: 609-396-9601
Fax: 609-396-9603
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – CALIFORNIA (Western Region)
1415 L Street, Suite 670
Sacramento, CA 95814
Tel: 916-449-1370
Fax: 916-449-1378
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – NEW YORK
90 South Swan Street
Albany, NY 12210
Tel: 518-443-2220
Fax: 518-443-2237
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – PENNSYLVANIA
116 Pine Street, Suite 205
Harrisburg, PA 17101
Tel: 717-232-0991
Fax: 717-232-0992
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – COLORADO
1535 Grant Street, Suite 225
Denver, CO 80203
Tel: 303-830-6772
Fax: 303-830-6775
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – TEXAS
(Southwestern Region)
700 Lavaca Street, Suite 1400
Austin, TX 78701
Tel: 512-334-6638
Fax: 847-759-4346
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – FLORIDA
215 S. Monroe Street, Suite 830
Tallahassee, FL 32302
Tel: 850-681-2615
Fax: 850-681-2614
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – WASHINGTON
(Northwestern Region)
1500 Water Street SW, Suite 2
Olympia, WA 98501
Tel: 360-915-6268
Fax: 360-357-5343
Web: www.pciaa.net

PCI – GEORGIA
6636 Church Street, Suite 300
Douglasville, GA 30134
Tel: 770-949-1776
Fax: 770-949-0889
Web: www.pciaa.net
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	131

 
Directories

PCI – WASHINGTON, DC
444 North Capitol Street NW, Suite 801
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: 202-639-0490
Fax: 202-639-0494
Web: www.pciaa.net

REINSURANCE ASSOCIATION
OF AMERICA
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20004
Tel: 202-638-3690
Fax: 202-638-0936
Web: www.reinsurance.org
Trade association of property/casualty
reinsurers; provides legislative services for
members.

SURETY & FIDELITY ASSOCIATION
OF AMERICA (SFAA)
1101 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-463-0600
Fax: 202-463-0606
Web: www.surety.org
Statistical, rating, development and
advisory organization for surety companies.

SURETY INFORMATION OFFICE
1828 L Street, NW, Suite 720
Washington, DC 20036-5104
Tel: 202-686-7463
Fax: 202-686-3656
Web: www.sio.org
Statistical, rating, development and
advisory organization for surety companies.
Membership includes insurance companies
licensed to write fidelity or surety insurance
in one or more states and foreign affiliates.

Life/Health
Insurance Industry
Organizations
AMERICA’S HEALTH
INSURANCE PLANS (AHIP)
601 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, South
Building, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004
Tel: 202-778-3200
Fax: 202-778-8486
Web: www.ahip.org
National trade association representing
health insurance plans providing medical,
long-term care, disability income, dental
supplemental, stop-gap and reinsurance
coverage.

AMERICAN COUNCIL OF
LIFE INSURERS (ACLI)
101 Constitution Avenue NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20001-2133
Tel: 202-624-2000
Fax: 202-572-4745
Web: www.acli.com
Trade association responsible for the public
affairs, government, legislative and research
aspects of the life insurance business.

THE LIFE AND HEALTH INSURANCE
FOUNDATION FOR EDUCATION
1655 North Fort Myer Drive, Suite 610
Arlington, VA 22209
Tel: 888-LIFE-777
Fax: 202-464-5011
Web: http://lifehappens.org
Nonprofit organization dedicated to
addressing the public’s growing need for
information and education about life, health,
disability and long-term care insurance.

132 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

LIFE INSURANCE SETTLEMENT
ASSOCIATION

NATIONAL ALLIANCE OF
LIFE COMPANIES (NALC)

1011 East Colonial Drive, Suite 500
Orlando, FL 32803
Tel: 407-894-3797
Fax: 407-897-1325
Web: www.thevoiceoftheindustry.org
Promotes the development, integrity and
reputation of the life settlement industry
and a competitive market for the people it
serves.

PO Box 50053
Sarasota, FL 34232
Tel: 941-379-6100
Fax: 941-379-6112
Web: www.nalc.net

LIMRA INTERNATIONAL
300 Day Hill Road
Windsor, CT 06095
Tel: 860-285-7787
Fax: 860-298-9555
Web: www.limra.com
Worldwide association providing research,
consulting and other services to insurance
and financial services companies in more
than 60 countries. LIMRA helps its member
companies maximize their marketing
effectiveness.

LOMA (LIFE OFFICE
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION)
2300 Windy Ridge Parkway, Suite 600
Atlanta, GA 30339-8443
Tel: 770-951-1770
Fax: 770-984-0441
Web: www.loma.org
Worldwide association of insurance
companies specializing in research and
education, with a primary focus on home
office management.

MIB, INC.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
HEALTH UNDERWRITERS
2000 North 14th Street, Suite 450
Arlington, VA 22201
Tel: 703-276-0220
Fax: 703-841-7797
Web: www.nahu.org
Professional association of people who
sell and service disability income, and
hospitalization and major medical health
insurance companies.

NATIONAL ORGANIZATION
OF LIFE AND HEALTH
INSURANCE GUARANTY
ASSOCIATIONS (NOLHGA)
13873 Park Center Road, Suite 329
Herndon, VA 20171
Tel: 703-481-5206
Fax: 703-481-5209
Web: www.nolhga.com
A voluntary association composed of
the life and health insurance guaranty
associations of all 50 states, the District
of Columbia and Puerto Rico. When
insolvency involves multiple states,
NOLHGA assists its state guaranty
association members in fulfilling their
statutory obligations to policyholders.

50 Braintree Hill Park, Suite 400
Braintree, MA 02184-8734
Tel: 781-751-6000
Web: www.mib.com/html/lost-lifeinsurance.html
Database of individual life insurance
applications processed since 1995.

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	133

 
Directories

Financial
Services Industry
Organizations
ADVANTAGE GROUP
ASSOCIATES, INC.
215 SE Wildflower Court
Pleasant Hill, IA 50327
Tel: 515-262-2623
Web: www.annuityspecs.com
A third-party market research firm that
tracks indexed annuity and indexed life
products, carriers and sales.

AMERICAN BANKERS ASSOCIATION
1120 Connecticut Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 800-BANKERS
Fax: 202-828-4540
Web: www.aba.com
Represents banks of all sizes on issues
of national importance for financial
institutions and their customers. Brings
together all categories of banking
institutions, including community, regional
and money center banks and holding
companies, as well as savings associations,
trust companies and savings banks.

AMERICAN BANKERS
INSURANCE ASSOCIATION
1120 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-663-5163
Fax: 202-828-4546
Web: www.theabia.com
A separately chartered affiliate of the
American Bankers Association. A full
service association for bank insurance
interests dedicated to furthering the
policy and business objectives of banks in
insurance.

AMERICAN FINANCIAL
SERVICES ASSOCIATION
115 S. LaSalle Street, Suite 3300
Chicago, IL 60603-3801
Tel: 800-224-0900
Fax: 312-683-2373
Web: www.americanfinsvcs.com
The national trade association for market
funded providers of financial services to
consumers and small businesses.

BANK ADMINISTRATION INSTITUTE
One North Franklin, Suite 1000
Chicago, IL 60606-3421
Tel: 888-284-4078
Fax: 800-375-5543
Web: www.bai.org
A professional organization devoted
exclusively to improving the performance
of financial services companies through
strategic research and information,
education and training.

BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL
SETTLEMENTS
CH-4002, Basel, Centralbahnplatz 2
Basel, Switzerland
Tel: 41-61-280-8080
Fax: 41-61-280-9100
Web: www.bis.org
An international organization which fosters
cooperation among central banks and
other agencies in pursuit of monetary and
financial stability.

134 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

BANK INSURANCE &
SECURITIES ASSOCIATION

CERTIFIED FINANCIAL PLANNER
BOARD OF STANDARDS, INC.

303 West Lancaster Avenue, Suite 2D
Wayne, PA 19087
Tel: 610-989-9047
Fax: 610-989-9102
Web: www.bisanet.org
Fosters the full integration of securities
and insurance businesses with depository
institutions’ traditional banking businesses.
Participants include executives from the
securities, insurance, investment advisory,
trust, private banking, retail, capital
markets and commercial divisions of
depository institutions.

1425 K Street NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-379-2200
Fax: 202-379-2299
Web: www.cfp.net
Group whose mission is to create
awareness of the importance of financial
planning and the value of the financial
planning process and to help underserved
populations have access to competent and
ethical financial planning.

BANK INSURANCE MARKET
RESEARCH GROUP

PO Box 11910
Lexington, KY 40578-1910
Tel: 859-244-8175
Web: www.collegesavings.org
The College Savings Plans Network is an
affiliate to the National Association of State
Treasurers. It is intended to make higher
education more attainable. The Network
serves as a clearinghouse for information
on existing college savings programs.

154 East Boston Post Road
Mamaroneck, NY 10543
Tel: 914-381-7475
Web: www.singerpubs.com
Provides market research and investment
sales data to the bank and insurance
industries based on in-depth surveys
of depository and insurance entities
augmented by analysis of government data.

BANKINSURANCE.
COM NEWSLETTER
823 King of Prussia Road
Radnor, PA 19087
Tel: 610-254-0440
Fax: 610-254-5044
Web: www.bankinsurance.com
A monthly electronic publication that
distills the important news stories in
the bank insurance and investment
marketplace with information, impact
and analytic benchmarking not found
elsewhere.

	

COLLEGE SAVINGS
PLANS NETWORK

THE COMMITTEE OF
ANNUITY INSURERS
c/o Davis & Harman LLP
1455 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 1200
Tel: 202-347-2230
Fax: 202-393-3310
Web: www.annuity-insurers.org
Group whose goal is to address federal
legislative and regulatory issues relevant
to the annuity industry and to participate
in the development of federal tax and
securities policies regarding annuities.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	135

 
Directories

COMMODITY FUTURES
TRADING COMMISSION

EASTBRIDGE CONSULTING
GROUP, INC.

Three Lafayette Centre
1155 21st Street NW
Washington, DC 20581
Tel: 202-418-5000
Fax: 202-418-5521
Web: www.cftc.gov
Independent agency created by Congress
to protect market participants against
manipulation, abusive trade practices and
fraud.

50 Avon Meadow Lane
Avon, CT 06001
Tel: 860-676-9633
Web: www.eastbridge.com
Provides consulting, marketing, training
and research services to financial services
firms, including those involved in
worksite marketing and the distribution of
individual and employee benefits products.

CONFERENCE OF STATE
BANK SUPERVISORS
1155 Connecticut Avenue NW, 5th Floor
Washington, DC 20036-4306
Tel: 202-296-2840
Fax: 202-296-1928
Web: www.csbs.org
National organization that advocates on
behalf of the nation’s state banking system.

CONSUMERS BANKERS
ASSOCIATION
1000 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 2500
Arlington, VA 22209-3912
Tel: 703-276-1750
Fax: 703-528-1290
Web: www.cbanet.org
This group is the recognized voice on retail
banking issues in the nation’s capital.

DMA FINANCIAL SERVICES COUNCIL
1120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036-6700
Tel: 212-768-7277
Fax: 212-302-6714
Web: www.the-dma.org
Integrates the direct marketing concept, its
tactics and its practices with mainstream
insurance and financial services marketing
to create a strategic business synergism,
a division of the Direct Marketing
Association.

EMPLOYEE BENEFIT
RESEARCH INSTITUTE
1100 13th Street NW, Suite 878
Washington, DC 20037-1896
Tel: 202-659-0670
Fax: 202-775-6312
Web: www.ebri.org
The Institute’s mission is to advance the
public’s, the media’s and policymakers’
knowledge and understanding of employee
benefits and their importance to the U.S.
economy.

FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
CORPORATION (FDIC)
550 17th Street NW
Washington, DC 20429-9990
Tel: 877-275-3342
Web: www.fdic.gov
The FDIC’s mission is to maintain the
stability of and public confidence in the
nation’s financial system. To achieve this
goal, the FDIC has insured deposits and
promoted safe and sound banking practices
since 1933.

136 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

FEDERAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
EXAMINATION COUNCIL

THE FINANCIAL PLANNING
ASSOCIATION

3501 Fairfax Drive
Arlington, VA 22201-2305
Tel: 703-516-5487
Fax: 703-516-5588
Web: www.ffiec.gov
A formal interagency body empowered to
prescribe uniform principles, standards, and
report forms for the federal examination
of financial institutions by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

4100 East Mississippi Avenue, Suite 400
Denver, CO 80246-3053
Tel: 800-322-4237
Fax: 303-759-0749
Web: www.fpanet.org
Group whose primary aim is to foster the
value of financial planning and advance
the financial planning profession.

FEDERAL RESERVE
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20551
Tel: 202-452-3000
Web: www.federalreserve.gov
Central bank of the United States, founded
by Congress in 1913 to provide the nation
with a safer, more flexible and more stable
monetary and financial system.

FINANCIAL INDUSTRY REGULATORY
AUTHORITY (FINRA)
1735 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
Tel: 301-590-6500
Fax: 240-386-4838
Web: www.finra.org
Largest non-governmental regulator for
all securities firms doing business in the
United States. Created in July 2007 through
the consolidation of NASD and the member
regulation, enforcement and arbitration
functions of the New York Stock Exchange.

FINANCIAL SERVICES FORUM
601 13th Street NW, Suite 750 South
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-457-8765
Fax: 202-457-8769
Web: www.financialservicesforum.org
An organization of 20 chief executive
officers of major U.S. financial services
firms dedicated to the execution and
coordination of activities designed to
promote the development of an open and
competitive financial services industry.

THE FINANCIAL SERVICES
ROUNDTABLE
1001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 500
South
Washington, DC 20004
Tel: 202-289-4322
Fax: 202-628-2507
Web: www.fsround.org
A forum for U.S. financial industry leaders
working together to determine and
influence the most critical public policy
concerns related to the integration of the
financial services.

FUTURES INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
2001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20006
Tel: 202-466-5460
Fax: 202-296-3184
Web: www.futuresindustry.org
Association representative of all organizations
that have an interest in the futures market.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	137

 
Directories

GLOBAL ASSOCIATION OF
RISK PROFESSIONALS
111 Town Square Place, Suite 1215
Jersey City, NJ 07310
Tel: 201-719-7210
Fax: 201-222-5022
Web: www.garp.com
International group whose aim is to
encourage and enhance communications
between risk professionals, practitioners
and regulators worldwide.

THE HEDGE FUND ASSOCIATION
2875 Northeast 191st Street, Suite 900
Aventura, FL 33180
Tel: 202-478-2000
Fax: 202-478-1999
Web: www.thehfa.org
An international not-for-profit association
of hedge fund managers, service providers
and investors formed to unite the hedge
fund industry and add to the increasing
awareness of the advantages and
opportunities in hedge funds.

INSURANCE MARKETPLACE
STANDARDS ASSOCIATION
4550 Montgomery Avenue, Suite 700N
Bethesda, MD 20814
Tel: 240-744-3030
Fax: 240-744-3031
Web: www.imsaethics.org
A nonprofit, independent organization
created to strengthen consumer trust
and confidence in the marketplace for
individually sold life insurance, long-term
care insurance and annuities.

INSURED RETIREMENT INSTITUTE
1331 L St, NW Ste. 310
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-469-3000
Fax: 202-898-5786
Web: www.irionline.org
Source of knowledge pertaining to
annuities, insured retirement products and

retirement planning; provides educational
and informational resources. Formerly the
National Association for Variable Annuities
(NAVA).

INTERNATIONAL SWAPS AND
DERIVATIVES ASSOCIATION
360 Madison Avenue, 16th Floor
New York, NY 10017
Tel: 212-901-6000
Fax: 212-901-6001
Web: www.isda.org
The association’s primary purpose is
to encourage the prudent and efficient
development of the privately negotiated
derivatives business.

INVESTMENT COMPANY INSTITUTE
1401 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-326-5800
Web: www.ici.org
The national association of the American
investment company industry.

KEHRER-LIMRA
300 Day Hill Road
Windsor, CT 06095-4761
Tel: 978-448-0198
Fax: 860-298-9555
Web: www.kehrerlimra.com
Consultant focusing on the financial
services marketplace. Conducts studies
of sales penetration, profitability,
compensation and compliance.

MICHAEL WHITE ASSOCIATES
823 King of Prussia Road
Radnor, PA 19087
Tel: 610-254-0440
Fax: 610-254-5044
Web: www.bankinsurance.com
Consulting firm that helps clients plan,
develop and implement bank insurance
sales programs. Conducts research on and
benchmarks performance of bank insurance
and investment fee income activities.

138 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

MORTGAGE BANKERS
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
FEDERAL CREDIT UNIONS

1331 L Street NW
Washington, DC 20006-3404
Tel: 202-557-2700
Web: www.mbaa.org
Represents the real estate finance industry.

3138 10th Street North
Arlington, VA 22201-2149
Tel: 800-336-4644
Fax: 703-524-1082
Web: www.nafcunet.org
Trade association that exclusively
represents the interests of federal credit
unions before the federal government and
the public.

MORTGAGE INSURANCE
COMPANIES OF AMERICA (MICA)
1425 K Street, Suite 210
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-682-2683
Fax: 202-842-9252
Web: www.privatemi.com
Represents the private mortgage insurance
industry. MICA provides information on
related legislative and regulatory issues, and
strives to enhance understanding of the
vital role private mortgage insurance plays
in housing Americans.

MUSEUM OF AMERICAN FINANCE
48 Wall Street
New York, NY 10005
Tel: 212-908-4110
Fax: 212-908-4601
Web: www.financialhistory.org
An affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution,
the museum is the nation’s only
independent public museum dedicated to
celebrating the spirit of entrepreneurship
and the democratic free market tradition.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
FOR FIXED ANNUITIES
2300 East Kensington Boulevard
Milwaukee, WI 53211
Tel: 414-332-9306
Fax: 415-946-3532
Web: www.nafa.us
Promotes the growth, acceptance and
understanding of annuity and life products;
provides educational and informational
resources.

	

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE AND
FINANCIAL ADVISORS
2901 Telestar Court, PO Box 12012
Falls Church, VA 22042-1205
Tel: 703-770-8100; 877-866-2432
Fax: 703-770-8224
Web: www.naifa.org
Professional association representing health
and life insurance agents.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
INVESTMENT PROFESSIONALS
Tel: 952-322-4322
Web: www.naip.com/
Promotes the interests and the image of
its financial professionals members, and
encourages and facilitates higher levels of
competency in members so that they may
better serve the investing public.

THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
PERSONAL FINANCIAL ADVISORS
3250 North Arlington Heights Road
Suite 109
Arlington Heights, IL 60004
Tel: 847-483-5400
Fax: 847-483-5415
Web: www.napfa.org
Organization of fee-only financial planning
professionals serving individuals and
institutions.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	139

 
Directories

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF PROFESSIONAL
INSURANCE AGENTS
400 North Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-2353
Tel: 703-836-9340
Fax: 703-836-1279
Web: www.pianet.com
Trade association of independent insurance
agents.

NATIONAL CREDIT UNION
ADMINISTRATION
1775 Duke Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-3428
Tel: 703-518-6300
Fax: 703-518-6660
Web: www.ncua.gov
An independent agency in the executive
branch of the federal government
responsible for chartering, insuring,
supervising and examining federal credit
unions.

OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION
1700 G Street NW
Washington, DC 20552
Tel: 202-906-6000
Web: www.ots.treas.gov
The primary regulator of all federal and
many state-chartered thrift institutions,
which include savings banks and savings
and loan associations.

OPTIONS INDUSTRY COUNCIL
One North Wacker Drive, Suite 500
Chicago, IL 60606
Tel: 800-678-4667
Web: www.optionscentral.com
Nonprofit association created to educate
the investing public and brokers about
the benefits and risks of exchange-traded
options.

PENSION RESEARCH COUNCIL

300 South Riverside Plaza, #1800
Chicago, IL 60606-6615
Tel: 312-781-1300
Fax: 312-781-1467
Web: www.nfa.futures.org
Industrywide self-regulatory organization
for the commodity futures industry.

The Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, 3000
Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
Tel: 215-898-7620
Fax: 215-573-3418
Web: www.pensionresearchcouncil.org/
about
Organization committed to generating
debate on key policy issues affecting
pensions and other employee benefits.

NATIONAL REVERSE MORTGAGE
LENDERS ASSOCIATION

RETIREMENT INCOME
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION

NATIONAL FUTURES ASSOCIATION

1400 16th Street NW, Suite 420
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-939-1760
Fax: 202-265-4435
Web: www.nrmlaonline.org
The group educates consumers about the
opportunity to utilize reverse mortgages
and trains lenders to be sensitive to the
needs of older Americans.

101 Federal Street, Suite 1900
Boston, MA 02110
Tel: 617-342-7390
Fax: 617-342-7080
Web: www.riia-usa.org
Financial services industry association
focusing on the financial and public
policy issues related to the income needs
of retirees. Members include insurance
companies, banks, securities firms and
others.

140 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION

VARDS/MORNINGSTAR, INC.

100 F Street NE
Washington, DC 20549
Tel: 202-942-8088
Web: www.sec.gov
Primary mission is to protect investors and
maintain the integrity of the securities
markets.

SECURITIES INDUSTRY
AND FINANCIAL MARKETS
ASSOCIATION (SIFMA)
120 Broadway, 35th Floor
New York, NY 10271-0080
Tel: 212-313-1200
Fax: 212-313-1301
Web: www.sifma.org
Association bringing together the shared
interests of securities firms to accomplish
common goals.

SOCIETY OF FINANCIAL
SERVICES PROFESSIONALS
17 Campus Boulevard, Suite 201
Newtown Square, PA 19073-3230
Tel: 610-526-2500
Fax: 610-527-1499
Web: www.financialpro.org
Advances the professionalism of
credentialed members with state-of-the-art
resources to serve their clients’ financial
needs.

TOWERGROUP
Two Charles River Place, 63 Kendrick Street
Needham, MA 02494-2708
Tel: 781-292-5200
Fax: 781-449-6982
Web: www.towergroup.com
Research and advisory firm focused exclusively
on the global financial services industry.

	

225 West Wacker Drive
Chicago, IL 60606
Tel: 312-696-6000
Web: http://corporate.morningstar.com
Software technology and research data
firm that helps annuity manufacturers,
distributors, and financial advisors
implement new technology and business
practices in the sale and servicing of
annuities.

Agents And Brokers

(See also state organizations section)

AGENTS FOR CHANGE
1001 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Suite 500 South
Washington, D.C. 20004
Tel: 202 589-1929
Fax: 202 628-2507
Web: www.agents4change.net
A trade association of insurance agents and
brokers from across all lines of insurance
working together to enact a national
insurance charter to allow producers and
insurers the option of being regulated at
either the federal or state level.

AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
MANAGING GENERAL AGENTS
150 South Warner Road, Suite 156
King of Prussia, PA 19406
Tel: 610-225-1999
Fax: 610-225-1996
Web: http://www.aamga.org
Membership association of managing
general agents of insurers.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	141

 
Directories

THE COUNCIL OF INSURANCE
AGENTS AND BROKERS
701 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 750
Washington, DC 20004-2608
Tel: 202-783-4400
Fax: 202-783-4410
Web: http://www.ciab.com
A trade organization representing leading
commercial insurance agencies and
brokerage firms.

INDEPENDENT INSURANCE AGENTS
& BROKERS OF AMERICA, INC.
127 S. Peyton Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: 800-221-7917
Fax: 703-683-7556
Web: www.iiaba.org
Trade association of independent insurance
agents and brokers.

LATIN AMERICAN AGENTS
ASSOCIATION
11819 Valley Boulevard
El Monte, CA 91732
Tel: 626-444-0999
Fax: 626-444-2999
Web: www.latinagents.com
An independent group of Hispanic agents
and brokers, whose goal is to educate,
influence and inform the insurance
community about the specific needs of the
Latino community in the United States.

LATIN AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE AGENCIES
2550 Northwest 72nd Avenue, Suite 318
Miami, FL 33122
Tel: 305-477-1442
Fax: 305-477-5298
Web: www.laaia.com
An association of insurance professionals
whose purpose is to protect the rights of its
members, benefit the consumer through
education, provide information and
networking services, and promote active

participation in the political environment
and community service.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF PROFESSIONAL
INSURANCE AGENTS
400 N. Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-2353
Tel: 703-836-9340
Fax: 703-836-1279
Web: www.pianet.com
Trade association of independent insurance
agents.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE AND
FINANCIAL ADVISORS
2901 Telestar Court, PO Box 12012
Falls Church, VA 22042-1205
Tel: 703-770-8100
Web: www.naifa.org
Professional association representing health
and life insurance agents.

Regulatory/
Legislative
Organizations
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS
2301 McGee Street, Suite 800
Kansas City, MO 64108-2662
Tel: 816-842-3600
Fax: 816-783-8175
Web: www.naic.org
Organization of state insurance
commissioners to promote uniformity
in state supervision of insurance matters
and to recommend legislation in state
legislatures.

142 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF
INSURANCE GUARANTY FUNDS
300 North Meridian Street, Suite 1020
Indianapolis, IN 46204
Tel: 317-464-8199
Fax: 317-464-8180
Web: www.ncigf.org
Advisory organization to the state guaranty
fund boards; gathers and disseminates
information regarding insurer insolvencies.

NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF
INSURANCE LEGISLATORS
385 Jordan Road
Troy, NY 12180
Tel: 518-687-0178
Fax: 518-687-0401
Web: www.ncoil.org
Organization of state legislators whose
main area of public policy concern is
insurance and insurance regulation.

720 Providence Road, Suite 100
Malvern, PA 19355-0716
Tel: 800-644-2101
Fax: 610-640-9576
Web: www.aicpcu.org
An independent, nonprofit educational
organization that confers the Chartered
Property Casualty Underwriter (CPCU)
professional designation on those
individuals who meet its education,
experience and ethics requirements.

CFA INSTITUTE

Educational
Organizations
THE AMERICAN COLLEGE
270 South Bryn Mawr Avenue
Bryn Mawr, PA 19010
Tel: 610-526-1000
Fax: 610-526-1465
Web: www.theamericancollege.edu
An independent, accredited nonprofit
institution, originally The American
College of Life Underwriters. Provides
graduate and professional education in
insurance and other financial services.

	

AMERICAN INSTITUTE FOR
CHARTERED PROPERTY
CASUALTY UNDERWRITERS

560 Ray C. Hunt Drive
Charlottesville, VA 22903-2981
Tel: 800-247-8132
Fax: 434-951-5262
Web: www.cfainstitute.org
Global membership organization that
awards the CFA designation, the institute
leads the investment industry by setting
the highest standards of ethics and
professional excellence and vigorously
advocating fair and transparent capital
markets.

CPCU (CHARTERED
PROPERTY CASUALTY
UNDERWRITERS) SOCIETY
720 Providence Road
Malvern, PA 19355-0709
Tel: 800-932-2728
Fax: 610-251-2780
Web: www.cpcusociety.org
Professional society established to foster
the higher education of those engaged
in insurance and risk management;
encourages and conducts research.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	143

 
Directories

GRIFFITH INSURANCE
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
623 High Street
Worthington, OH 43085
Tel: 614-880-9870
Fax: 614-880-9872
Web: www.griffithfoundation.org
The foundation promotes the teaching and
study of risk management and insurance
at colleges and universities nationwide and
provides education programs for public
policymakers on the basic principles of risk
management and insurance.

INSURANCE INSTITUTE
OF AMERICA, INC.
720 Providence Road, Suite 100
Malvern, PA 19355-0716
Tel: 800-644-2101
Fax: 610-640-9576
Web: www.aicpcu.org
Provides educational programs and
professional certification to people in
property and liability insurance. Offerings
range from entry-level to advanced,
specialized programs. Certification is
determined through the administration of
national exams.

INSURANCE LIBRARY
ASSOCIATION OF BOSTON
156 State Street
Boston, MA 02109
Tel: 617-227-2087
Fax: 617-723-8524
Web: www.insurancelibrary.org
The Insurance Library Association of
Boston founded in 1887, is a nonprofit
insurance association that has an extensive
insurance library on all lines of insurance.

SCHOOL OF RISK MANAGEMENT,
INSURANCE AND ACTUARIAL
SCIENCE OF THE TOBIN
COLLEGE OF BUSINESS AT
STREET JOHN’S UNIVERSITY
101 Murray Street
New York, NY 10007
Tel: 212-277-5193
Fax: 212-277-5189
Web: www.stjohns.edu/academics/
graduate/tobin/srm
Insurance industry-supported college
providing a curriculum leading to
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in business
administration, financial management
of risk, insurance finance and actuarial
science. The Kathryn and Shelby Cullom
Davis Library (212-217-5135) provides
services, products and resources to its
members.

SOCIETY OF CERTIFIED
INSURANCE COUNSELORS
The National Alliance for Insurance
Education & Research, PO Box 27027
Austin, TX 78755-2027
Tel: 800-633-2165
Fax: 512-349-6194
Web: www.scic.com
National education program in property,
liability and life insurance, with a continuing
education requirement upon designation.

SOCIETY OF FINANCIAL EXAMINERS
174 Grace Boulevard
Altamonte Springs, FL 32714
Tel: 407-682-4930
Fax: 407-682-3175
Web: www.sofe.org
Professional society for examiners of
insurance companies, banks, savings and
loans, and credit unions.

144 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

SOCIETY OF INSURANCE
TRAINERS AND EDUCATORS

GROUP OF NORTH AMERICAN
INSURANCE ENTERPRISES

6635 West Happy Valley Road
Suite A104-#444
Glendale, AZ 85310
Tel: 623-547-6401
Fax: 623-547-6814
Web: www.insurancetrainers.org
Professional organization of trainers and
educators in insurance.

40 Exchange Place, Suite 1707
New York, NY 10005
Tel: 212-480-0808
Fax: 212-480-9090
Web: www.gnaie.net
International group whose goals are
to influence international accounting
standards to ensure that they result in
high quality accounting standards for
insurance companies and, to that end, to
increase communication between insurers
doing business in North America and
the International Accounting Standards
Board and the U.S. Financial Accounting
Standards Board.

Specialty
Organizations
Actuarial/Accounting
THE ACTUARIAL FOUNDATION
475 North Martingale Road, Suite 600
Schaumburg, IL 60173-2226
Tel: 847-706-3535
Fax: 847-706-3599
Web: www.actuarialfoundation.org
Develops, funds and executes education
and research programs that serve the public
by harnessing the talents of actuaries.

AMERICAN ACADEMY
OF ACTUARIES
1100 17th Street NW, 7th Floor
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-223-8196
Fax: 202-872-1948
Web: www.actuary.org
Professional association for actuaries.
Issues standards of conduct and provides
government liaison and advisory opinions.

CASUALTY ACTUARIAL SOCIETY
4350 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 250
Arlington, VA 22203
Tel: 703-276-3100
Fax: 703-276-3108
Web: www.casact.org
Promotes actuarial and statistical science in
property/casualty insurance fields.
	

INSURANCE ACCOUNTING AND
SYSTEMS ASSOCIATION, INC.
3511 Shannon Road, Suite 160
Durham, NC 27707
Tel: 919-489-0991
Fax: 919-489-1994
Web: www.iasa.org
An international organization to promote
the study, research and development
of modern techniques in insurance
accounting and systems.

SOCIETY OF ACTUARIES
475 North Martingale Road, Suite 600
Schaumburg, IL 60173
Tel: 847-706-3500
Fax: 847-706-3599
Web: www.soa.org
An educational, research and professional
organization dedicated to serving the
public and its members. The Society’s
vision is for actuaries to be recognized as
the leading professionals in the modeling
and management of financial risk and
contingent events.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	145

 
Directories

Adjusters
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INDEPENDENT
INSURANCE ADJUSTERS
825 West State Street, Suite 117-C&B
Geneva, IL 60134
Tel: 630-397-5012
Fax: 630-397-5013
Web: www.naiia.com
Association of claims adjusters and firms
operating independently on a fee basis for
all insurance companies.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
PUBLIC INSURANCE ADJUSTERS
21165 Whitefield Place #105
Potamac Falls, VA 20165
Tel: 703-433-9217
Web: www.napia.com
Association of adjusters who are employed
by policyholders.

Alternative Markets
CAPTIVE INSURANCE
COMPANIES ASSOCIATION
4248 Park Glen Rd.
Minneapolis, MN 55416
Tel: 952-928-4655
Fax: 952-929-1318
Web: www.cicaworld.com
Organization that disseminates information
useful to firms that utilize the captive
insurance company concept to solve
corporate insurance problems.

NATIONAL RISK RETENTION
ASSOCIATION

programs, organized pursuant to the
Federal Liability Risk Retention Act.

SELF-INSURANCE
INSTITUTE OF AMERICA
PO Box 1237
Simpsonville, SC 29681
Tel: 800-851-7789
Fax: 864-962-2483
Web: www.siia.org
Organization that fosters and promotes
alternative methods of risk protection.

Auto/Auto Insurance
AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE
PLANS SERVICE OFFICE
302 Central Avenue
Johnston, RI 02919
Tel: 401-946-2600
Fax: 401-528-1409
Web: www.aipso.com
Develops and files rates and provides other
services for state-mandated automobile
insurance plans.

CERTIFIED AUTOMOTIVE
PARTS ASSOCIATION
1518 K Street NW, Suite 306
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-737-2212
Fax: 202-737-2214
Web: www.capacertified.org
Nonprofit organization formed to develop
and oversee a test program guaranteeing
the suitability and quality of automotive
parts.

4248 Park Glen Road
Minneapolis, MN 55416
Tel: 952-928-4656
Fax: 952-929-1318
Web: www.nrra-usa.org
The voice of risk retention group and
purchasing group liability insurance

146 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

Automation and Claims Services

Community Development

ACORD

INSURANCE INDUSTRY
CHARITABLE FOUNDATION

Two Blue Hill Plaza, 3rd Floor, PO Box
1529,
Pearl River, NY 10965-8529
Tel: 845-620-1700
Fax: 845-620-3600
Web: www.acord.com
An industry-sponsored institute serving as
the focal point for improving the computer
processing of insurance transactions
through the insurance agency system.

IVANS (INSURANCE VALUE
ADDED NETWORK SERVICES)

NEIGHBORWORKS AMERICA

100 First Stamford Place
Stamford, CT 06902
Tel: 800-288-4826
Fax: 203-698-7299
Web: www.ivans.com
An industry-sponsored organization
offering a data communications network
linking agencies, companies and providers
of data to the insurance industry.

Aviation
GLOBAL AEROSPACE, INC.
51 John F. Kennedy Parkway
Short Hills, NJ 07078
Tel: 973-379-0800
Fax: 973-379-8602
Web: www.aau.com
A pool of property/casualty companies
engaged in writing all classes of aviation
insurance.

U.S. AVIATION UNDERWRITERS, INC.
One Seaport Plaza, 199 Water Street
New York, NY 10038-3526
Tel: 212-952-0100
Web: www.usau.com
Underwriting managers for Aircraft
Insurance Group.

	

1990 North California Boulevard, Suite 230
Walnut Creek, CA 94596
Tel: 925-280-8009
Fax: 925-280-8059
Web: www.iicf.org
The Insurance Industry Charitable
Foundation seeks to help communities and
enrich lives by combining the collective
strengths of the industry to provide grants,
volunteer service and leadership.
1325 G Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20005-3100
Tel: 202-220-2300
Fax: 202-376-2600
Web: www.nw.org/network/
neighborworksprogs/insurance/default.asp
The goal of this group is to develop
partnerships between the insurance
industry and NeighborWorks organizations
to better market the products and services
of both, for the benefit of the customers
and communities they serve.

Crime/Fraud
COALITION AGAINST
INSURANCE FRAUD
1012 14th Street NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-393-7330
Fax: 202-393-7329
Web: www.insurancefraud.org
An alliance of consumer, law enforcement,
and insurance industry groups dedicated
to reducing all forms of insurance fraud
through public advocacy and education.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	147

 
Directories

INSURANCE COMMITTEE
FOR ARSON CONTROL
3601 Vincennes Road
Indianapolis, IN 46268
Tel: 317-876-6226
Fax: 317-879-8408
Web: www.arsoncontrol.org
All-industry coalition that serves as a
catalyst for insurers’ anti-arson efforts and
a liaison with government agencies and
other groups devoted to arson control.

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
INSURANCE FRAUD AGENCIES, INC.
PO Box 10018
Kansas City, MO 64171
Tel: 816-756-5285
Fax: 816-756-5287
Web: www.iaifa.org
An international association opening the
doors of communication, cooperation
and exchange of information in the fight
against sophisticated global insurance and
related financial insurance fraud.

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
SPECIAL INVESTIGATION UNITS
8015 Corporate Drive, Suite A
Baltimore, MD 21236
Tel: 410-931-3332
Fax: 410-931-2060
Web: www.iasiu.com
Group whose goals are to promote a
coordinated effort within the industry to
combat insurance fraud and to provide
education and training for insurance
investigators.

NATIONAL INSURANCE
CRIME BUREAU (NICB)
1111 East Touhy Avenue, Suite 400
Des Plaines, IL 60018
Tel: 847-544-7000
Web: www.nicb.org
Not-for-profit organization dedicated to
combating crime and vehicle theft.

NATIONAL INSURANCE CRIME
BUREAU (NICB) - WASHINGTON
MEDIA RELATIONS
12701 Fair Lakes Circle, Suite 380
Fairfax, VA 22033
Tel: 703-222-6250; 888-241-7159
Fax: 703-469-2206
Web: www.nicb.org

NEW YORK ALLIANCE AGAINST
INSURANCE FRAUD
c/o New York Insurance Association, Inc.,
130 Washington Ave
Albany, NY 12210
Tel: 518-432-3576
Fax: 518-432-4220
Web: www.fraudny.com
A cooperative effort of insurance
companies in New York State to educate the
industry about the costs of insurance fraud,
the many forms is can take and what can
be done to fight it.

Crop Insurance
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
OF CROP INSURERS
1 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20001-1401
Tel: 202-789-4100
Fax: 202-408-7763
Web: www.cropinsurers.com/
Trade association of insurance companies
to promote crop insurance.

CROP INSURANCE
RESEARCH BUREAU
10800 Farley, Suite 330
Overland Park, KS 66210
Tel: 913-338-0470; 888-274-2472
Fax: 913-339-9336
Web: www.cropinsurance.org
Crop insurance trade organization.

148 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

NATIONAL CROP INSURANCE
SERVICES, INC.

AXCO INSURANCE
INFORMATION SERVICES

8900 Indian Creek Parkway, Suite 600
Overland Park, KS 66210-1567
Tel: 913-685-2767
Fax: 913-685-3080
Web: www.ag-risk.org
National trade association of insurance
companies writing hail insurance, fire
insurance and insurance against other
weather perils to growing crops, with rating
and research services for crop-hail and rain
insurers.

39 Cornhill
London, United Kingdom
Tel: 44-20-7623-9828
Fax: 44-20-7623-9003
Web: www.axcoinfo.com
Research firm providing detailed
insurance, healthcare and pensions market
information on 160 countries.

Flood Insurance
FEDERAL INSURANCE
ADMINISTRATION
500 C Street SW
Washington, DC 20472
Tel: 800-621-3362
Fax: 800-827-8112
Web: www.fema.gov
Administers the federal flood insurance
program.

International

53 Route de Malagnou
Geneva, CH-1208
Tel: 41-22-707-66-00
Fax: 41-22-736-75-36
Web: www.genevaassociation.org/
World organization formed by some 80
chief executive officers of leading insurance
companies in Europe, North America,
South America, Asia, Africa and Australia.
Its main goal is to research the growing
economic importance of worldwide
insurance activities in the major sectors of
the economy. Produces The Geneva Papers
and other publications.

GROUP OF NORTH AMERICAN
INSURANCE ENTERPRISES

ASSOCIATION OF
SUPERINTENDENTS OF
INSURANCE OF LATIN AMERICA
c/o Superintendencia de Valores y Seguros
Chile
Av. Libertador Bernardo O’Higgins 1449,
Piso 11
Tel: 56-2-473-4000
Fax: 56-2-473-4101
Web: www.assalweb.org
International body that brings together the
highest regulatory authorities in the Latin
American insurance field. Comprised of 20
Latin American countries in addition to
two associate members, Spain and Portugal.

	

GENEVA ASSOCIATION

40 Exchange Place, Suite 1707
New York, NY 10005
Tel: 212-480-0808
Fax: 212-480-9090
Web: www.gnaie.net
International group whose goals are
to influence international accounting
standards to ensure that they result in
high quality accounting standards for
insurance companies and, to that end, to
increase communication between insurers
doing business in North America and
the International Accounting Standards
Board and the U.S. Financial Accounting
Standards Board.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	149

 
Directories

INSURANCE SERVICES NETWORK
PO Box 455
Lake Forest, IL 60045
Tel: 847-234-4762
Fax: 847-295-2608
Web: www.isn-inc.com
Independent insurance information
company offering international industry
news and analyses of the regulatory climate
in dozens of countries. Publishes Insurance
Research Letter.

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE SUPERVISORS
c/o Bank For International Settlements
Basel, Switzerland CH-4002
Tel: 41-61-225-7300
Fax: 41-61-280-9151
Web: www.iaisweb.org
Represents insurance supervisory
authorities of some 100 jurisdictions.
Promotes cooperation among members and
sets international standards for insurance
supervision.

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION
OF RISK AND INSURANCE
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONS, INC.
c/o RIMS
1065 Avenue of the Americas, 13th Floor
Tel: 212-286-9292
Fax: 212-655-5931
Web: www.rims.org/ifrima
Worldwide umbrella organization dedicated
to the advancement of risk management
and its practice through education and
interaction.

INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE
SOCIETY, INC.
101 Murray Street
New York, NY 10007
Tel: 212-815-9291
Fax: 212-815-9297
Web: www.iisonline.org
A nonprofit membership organization
whose mission is to facilitate international
understandings, the transfer of ideas and
innovations, and the development of
personal networks across insurance markets
through a joint effort of leading executives
and academics throughout the world.

INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL
SECURITY ASSOCIATION
Institute for OSH, Rue Gachardstraat 88 b 4
Brussels, Belgium 1050
Tel: 32-2-643-44-92
Fax: 32-2-643-44-40
Web: http://information.prevention.issa.int
Nonprofit international organization
consisting of institutions and
administrative bodies dealing with diverse
aspects of social security in countries
around the world.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE
ADMINISTRATION
U.S. Department of Commerce, 1401
Constitution Avenue
Washington, DC 20230
Tel: 202-482-3809
Fax: 202-482-5819
Web: www.ita.doc.gov
Division of the U.S. Department of
Commerce that helps U.S. businesses
participate in the growing global
marketplace.

150 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

ORGANISATION FOR
ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
AND DEVELOPMENT (OECD)

SIGMA

2, rue André Pascal
75775 Paris Cedex, France 16
Tel: 33-1-45-24-82-00
Fax: 33-1-45-24-85-00
Web: www.oecd.org
International organization of industrialized,
market-economy countries. The OECD
publishes numerous reports, including the
Insurance Statistics Yearbook.

ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
(OECD), WASHINGTON CENTER
2001 L Street NW, Suite 650
Washington, DC 20036-4922
Tel: 202-785-6323
Fax: 202-785-0350
Web: www.oecdwash.org
Markets the publications of the OECD in
the and serves as an information center
for the U.S. market. The Center is engaged
in public outreach activities and acts as
a liaison office to the U.S. legislative and
executive branches.

OVERSEAS PRIVATE
INVESTMENT CORPORATION
1100 New York Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20527
Tel: 202-336-8400
Fax: 202-336-7949
Web: www.opic.gov
Self-sustaining U.S. government agency
providing political risk insurance and
finance services for U.S. investment in
developing countries.

	

c/o Swiss Re
Mythenquai 50/60, PO Box
Tel: 41-43-285-2121
Fax: 41-43-285-2999
Web: www.swissre.com
The sigma publication series provides
comprehensive information on
international insurance markets and indepth analyses of economic trends and
strategic issues in insurance, reinsurance
and financial services.

TOPICS
c/o Munich Re
Munich, Germany 80802
Tel: 49-89-38-91-0
Web: www.munichre.com
This annual publication presents a detailed
account of the natural catastrophes that
occurred in the past year and also examines
long-term trends.

WORLD FACT BOOK
c/o Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Washington, DC 20505
Tel: 703-482-0623
Fax: 703-482-1739
Web: www.cia.gov/cia/publications/
factbook/index.html
Produced by the CIA’s Directorate of
Intelligence, the fact book is a comprehensive
resource of facts and statistics on more than
250 countries and other entities.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	151

 
Directories

Legal Issues and Services
AMERICAN PREPAID LEGAL
SERVICES INSTITUTE
321 North Clark Street
Chicago, IL 60610
Tel: 312-988-5751
Fax: 312-988-5710
Web: www.aplsi.org
National membership organization
providing information and technical
assistance to lawyers, insurance companies,
administrators, marketers and consumers
regarding group and prepaid legal service
plans.

AMERICAN TORT REFORM
ASSOCIATION
1101 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-682-1163
Fax: 202-682-1022
Web: www.atra.org
A broad based, bipartisan coalition of
more than 300 businesses, corporations,
municipalities, associations and
professional firms that support civil justice
reform.

ARBITRATION FORUMS, INC.
3350 Buschwood Park Drive, Building 3,
Suite 295
Tampa, FL 33618-1500
Tel: 888-272-3453
Fax: 813-931-4618
Web: www.arbfile.org
Nonprofit provider of interinsurance
dispute resolution services for self-insureds,
insurers and claim service organizations.

DEFENSE RESEARCH INSTITUTE
150 North Michigan Avenue, Suite 300
Chicago, IL 60601
Tel: 312-795-1101
Fax: 312-795-0747
Web: www.dri.org
A national and international membership
association of lawyers and others concerned
with the defense of civil actions.

NATIONAL ARBITRATION FORUM
PO Box 50191
Minneapolis, MN 55405-0191
Tel: 800-474-2371
Fax: 952-345-1160
Web: www.arbitration-forum.com
A leading neutral administrator of
arbitration, mediation and other forms of
alternative dispute resolution worldwide.

NATIONAL STRUCTURED
SETTLEMENTS TRADE ASSOCIATION
2025 M Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-367-1159
Fax: 202-367-2159
Web: www.nssta.com
Trade association representing consultants,
insurers and others who are interested in
the resolution and financing of tort claims
through periodic payments.

Marine and Ground Transportation
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF
MARINE UNDERWRITERS
14 Wall Street, 8th Floor
New York, NY 10005
Tel: 212-233-0550
Fax: 212-227-5102
Web: www.aimu.org
Provides information of concern to marine
underwriters and promotes their interests.

152 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

INLAND MARINE UNDERWRITERS
ASSOCIATION
14 Wall Street, 8th Floor
New York, NY 10005
Tel: 212-233-0550
Fax: 212-227-5102
Web: www.imua.org
Forum for discussion of problems of
common concern to inland marine
insurers.

Nuclear Insurance
AMERICAN NUCLEAR INSURERS
95 Glastonbury Boulevard, Suite 300
Glastonbury, CT 06033
Tel: 860-682-1301
Fax: 860-659-0002
Web: www.amnucins.com
A nonprofit unincorporated association
through which liability insurance
protection is provided against hazards
arising out of nuclear reactor installations
and their operations.

Medical Malpractice/
Professional Liability
PHYSICIAN INSURERS
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

Professional

2275 Research Boulevard, Suite 250
Rockville, MD 20850
Tel: 301-947-9000
Fax: 301-947-9090
Web: www.thepiaa.org
Trade association representing physicianowned mutual insurance companies that
provide medical malpractice insurance.

APIW: A PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF WOMEN
IN INSURANCE

PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY
UNDERWRITING SOCIETY (PLUS)
5353 Wayzata Boulevard, Suite 600
Minneapolis, MN 55416
Tel: 952-746-2580; 800-845-0788
Fax: 952-746-2599
Web: www.plusweb.org
An international, nonprofit association that
provides educational opportunities and
programs to enhance the professionalism of
its members.

	

555 Fifth Avenue, 8th Floor
New York, NY 10017
Tel: 212-867-0228
Fax: 212-867-2544
Web: www.apiw.org
A professional association of women in
the insurance and reinsurance industry
and related fields. Provides professional
education, networking and support
services to encourage the development of
professional leadership among its members.

INSURANCE DATA MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION, INC. (IDMA)
545 Washington Boulevard
Jersey City, NJ 07310-1686
Tel: 201-469-3069
Fax: 201-748-1690
Web: www.idma.org
An independent, nonprofit, professional,
learned association dedicated to increasing
the level of professionalism, knowledge and
visibility of insurance data management. To
achieve that goal, IDMA focuses on courses
and certification, forums and seminars,
and data management publications and
periodicals.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	153

 
Directories

INSURANCE REGULATORY
EXAMINERS SOCIETY
12710 South Pflumm Road, Suite 200
Olathe, KS 66062
Tel: 913-768-4700
Fax: 913-768-4900
Web: www.go-ires.org
Nonprofit professional and educational
association for examiners and other
professionals working in insurance
industry.

NAIW
9343 East 95th Court South
Tulsa, OK 74133
Tel: 800-766-6249
Fax: 918-743-1968
Web: www.naiw.org
Fosters educational programs for members.
Promotes public safety and service programs.

NATIONAL AFRICAN-AMERICAN
INSURANCE ASSOCIATION
1718 M Street NW, PO Box 1110
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 866-56-NAAIA
Web: www.naaia.org
NAAIA fosters the nationwide presence,
participation and long-term financial
success of African-American insurance
professionals within the greater insurance
community and provides its members and
the insurance industry a forum for sharing
information and ideas that enhance
business and professional development.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF INSURANCE AND
FINANCIAL ADVISORS
2901 Telestar Court, PO Box 12012
Falls Church, VA 22042-1205
Tel: 703-770-8100; 877-866-2432
Fax: 703-770-8224
Web: www.naifa.org
Professional association representing health
and life insurance agents.

Property Insurance Plans
PROPERTY INSURANCE
PLANS SERVICE OFFICE
27 School Street, Suite 302
Boston, MA 02108
Tel: 617-371-4175
Fax: 617-371-4177
Web: www.pipso.com
Provides technical and administrative
services to state property insurance plans.

Reinsurance
INTERMEDIARIES AND
REINSURANCE UNDERWRITERS
ASSOCIATION, INC.
971 Route 202 North
Branchburg, NJ 08876
Tel: 908-203-0211
Fax: 908-203-0213
Web: www.irua.com
Educational association to encourage
the exchange of ideas among reinsurers
worldwide writing principally treaty
reinsurance.

REINSURANCE ASSOCIATION
OF AMERICA
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20004
Tel: 202-638-3690
Fax: 202-638-0936
Web: www.reinsurance.org
Trade association of property/casualty reinsurers; provides legislative services for members.

Risk Management
LOSS EXECUTIVES ASSOCIATION
PO Box 37
Tenafly, NJ 07670
Tel: 732-388-5700
Fax: 732-388-0171
Web: www.lossexecutives.com
A professional association of property loss
executives providing education to the industry.

154 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

Safety/Disaster Mitigation

NONPROFIT RISK
MANAGEMENT CENTER
15 North King Street, Suite 203
Leesburg, VA 20176
Tel: 202-785-3891
Fax: 202-296-0349
Web: www.nonprofitrisk.org
Conducts research and education on risk
management and insurance issues of
special concern to nonprofit organizations.

PUBLIC RISK MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION
500 Montgomery Street, Suite 750
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: 703-528-7701
Fax: 703-739-0200
Web: www.primacentral.org
Membership organization representing risk
managers in state and local public entities.

RISK AND INSURANCE
MANAGEMENT SOCIETY, INC.
1065 Avenue of the Americas, 13th Floor
New York, NY 10018
Tel: 212-286-9292
Web: www.rims.org
Organization of corporate buyers of
insurance, which makes known to insurers
the insurance needs of business and
industry, supports loss prevention and
provides a forum for the discussion.

SOCIETY OF RISK MANAGEMENT
CONSULTANTS
330 S. Executive Dr., Suite 301
Brookfield, WI 53005-4275
Tel: 800-765-SRMC
Web: www.srmcsociety.org
International organization of professionals
engaged in risk management, insurance
and employee benefits consulting.

	

ADVOCATES FOR HIGHWAY
AND AUTO SAFETY
750 First Street NE, Suite 901
Washington, DC 20002
Tel: 202-408-1711
Fax: 202-408-1699
Web: www.saferoads.org
An alliance of consumer, safety and insurance
organizations dedicated to highway and auto
safety.

HIGHWAY LOSS DATA INSTITUTE
1005 North Glebe Road, Suite 800
Arlington, VA 22201
Tel: 703-247-1600
Fax: 703-247-1595
Web: www.hwysafety.org
Nonprofit organization to gather, process
and provide the public with insurance data
concerned with human and economic
losses resulting from highway accidents.

INSTITUTE FOR BUSINESS
& HOME SAFETY (IBHS)
4775 East Fowler Avenue
Tampa, FL 33617
Tel: 813-286-3400
Fax: 813-286-9960
Web: www.disastersafety.org
The Institute for Business & Home Safety
works to reduce the social and economic
effects of natural disasters and other
property losses by conducting research
and advocating improved construction,
maintenance and preparation practices.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	155

 
Directories

INSURANCE INSTITUTE FOR
HIGHWAY SAFETY (IIHS)

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
BUILDING SCIENCES

1005 North Glebe Road, Suite 800
Arlington, VA 22201
Tel: 703-247-1500
Fax: 703-247-1588
Web: www.highwaysafety.org
Research and education organization
dedicated to reducing loss, death, injury,
and property damage on the highways.
Fully funded by property/casualty insurers.

1090 Vermont Avenue NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20005-4905
Tel: 202-289-7800
Fax: 202-289-1092
Web: www.nibs.org/pubsbetec.html
A nonprofit, nongovernmental
organization bringing together
representatives of government, the
professions, industry, labor and consumer
interests to focus on the identification
and resolution of problems and potential
problems that hamper the construction
of safe, affordable structures for housing,
commerce and industry throughout the
United States.

LIGHTNING PROTECTION INSTITUTE
PO Box 99
Maryville, MO 64468
Tel: 800-488-6864
Web: www.lightning.org
Not-for-profit organization dedicated
to ensuring that its members’ lightning
protection systems are the best possible
quality in design, materials and
installation.

NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION
ASSOCIATION
One Batterymarch Park
Quincy, MA 02169-7471
Tel: 617-770-3000
Fax: 617-770-0700
Web: www.nfpa.org
Independent, nonprofit source of
information on fire protection, prevention
and suppression. Develops and publishes
consensus fire safety standards; sponsors
national Learn Not to Burn campaign.

NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION (NHTSA)
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, West Building
Washington, DC 20590
Tel: 888-327-4236
Fax: 202-366-2106
Web: www.nhtsa.dot.gov
Carries out programs and studies aimed at
reducing economic losses in motor vehicle
crashes and repairs.

NATIONAL SAFETY COUNCIL
1121 Spring Lake Drive
Itasca, IL 60143-3201
Tel: 630-285-1121 or 800-621-7619
Fax: 630-285-1315
Web: www.nsc.org
Provides national support and leadership in
the field of safety, publishes safety material
and conducts public information and
publicity programs.
fire insurance claims.

UNDERWRITERS’
LABORATORIES, INC.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
Tel: 847-272-8800
Fax: 847-272-8129
Web: www.ul.com
Investigates and tests electrical materials
and other products to determine that fire
prevention and protection standards are
being met.

156 	 I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook

 
Directories

Surety, Financial Guaranty
and Mortgage

SURETY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

ASSOCIATION OF FINANCIAL
GUARANTY INSURORS
Mackin & Company,139 Lancaster Street
Albany, NY 12210
Tel: 518-449-4698
Fax: 518-432-5651
Web: www.afgi.org
Trade association of the insurers and
reinsurers of municipal bonds and assetbacked securities.

MORTGAGE INSURANCE
COMPANIES OF AMERICA (MICA)
1425 K Street, Suite 210
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202-682-2683
Fax: 202-842-9252
Web: www.privatemi.com
Represents the private mortgage insurance
industry. MICA provides information on
related legislative and regulatory issues, and
strives to enhance understanding of the
vital role private mortgage insurance plays
in housing Americans.

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF SURETY BOND
PRODUCERS (NASBP)
1828 L Street NW, Suite 720
Washington, DC 20036-5104
Tel: 202-686-3700
Fax: 202-686-3656
Web: www.nasbp.org
NASBP members are professionals who
specialize in providing surety bonds
for construction and other commercial
purposes to companies and individuals
needing the assurance offered by surety
bonds. Its members have broad knowledge
of the surety marketplace and the business
strategies and underwriting differences
among surety companies.

	

1101 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-463-0600
Fax: 202-463-0606
Web: www.surety.org
Statistical, rating, development and
advisory organization for surety companies.

SURETY INFORMATION OFFICE
1828 L Street NW, Suite 720
Washington, DC 20036-5104
Tel: 202-686-7463
Fax: 202-686-3656
Web: www.sio.org
Statistical, rating, development and
advisory organization for surety companies.
Membership includes insurance companies
licensed to write fidelity or surety insurance
in one or more states and foreign affiliates.
Surplus Lines Organizations

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
PROFESSIONAL SURPLUS
LINES OFFICES, LTD.
200 Northeast 54th Street, Suite 200
Kansas City, MO 64118
Tel: 816-741-3910
Fax: 816-741-5409
Web: www.napslo.org
Professional association of wholesale
brokers, excess and surplus lines
companies, affiliates and supporting
members.

Surplus Lines
(See state organizations section)

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	157

 
Directories

Title Insurance
AMERICAN LAND TITLE
ASSOCIATION
1828 L Street NW, Suite 705
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 800-787-ALTA
Fax: 888-787-ALTA
Web: www.alta.org
Trade organization for title insurers,
abstractors and agents. Performs statistical
research and lobbying services.

Weather
WEATHER RISK MANAGEMENT
ASSOCIATION (WRMA)

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
SOCIAL INSURANCE
1776 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 615
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202-452-8097
Fax: 202-452-8111
Web: www.nasi.org/info-url_nocat2708/
info-url_nocat.htm
A nonprofit, nonpartisan organization
made up of the nation’s leading experts on
social insurance. Its mission is to promote
understanding and informed policymaking
on social insurance and related programs
through research, public education,
training and the open exchange of ideas.

750 National Press Building, 529 14th
Street, NW
Washington, DC 20045
Tel: 202-289-3800
Fax: 202-223-9741
Web: www.wrma.org
The goal of the WRMA is to serve the
weather risk management industry by
providing forums for discussion and
interaction with others associated with
financial weather products.

NCCI HOLDINGS, INC.

Workers Compensation

955 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
Tel: 617-661-9274
Web: www.wcrinet.org
A nonpartisan, not-for-profit membership
organization conducting public policy
research on workers’ compensation, health
care and disability issues. Members include
employers, insurers, insurance regulators
and state regulatory agencies, as well as
several state labor organizations.

INTEGRATED BENEFITS INSTITUTE
595 Market Street, Suite 810
San Francisco, CA 94105
Tel: 415-222-7280
Fax: 415-222-7281
Web: www.ibiweb.org
A private, nonprofit organization that
provides research, discussion and analysis,
data services and legislative review to
measure and improve integrated benefits
programs, enhance efficiency in delivery of
all employee-based benefits and promote
effective return-to-work.

901 Peninsula Corporate Circle
Boca Raton, FL 33487
Tel: 561-893-1000
Fax: 561-893-1191
Web: www.ncci.com
Develops and administers rating plans
and systems for workers compensation
insurance.

WORKERS COMPENSATION
RESEARCH INSTITUTE

158 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

Research
and Ratings
Organizations

CONNING RESEARCH AND
CONSULTING, INC.

A.M. BEST COMPANY INC.
Ambest Road
Oldwick, NJ 08858
Tel: 908-439-2200
Web: www.ambeStreetcom
Rating organization and publisher of
reference books and periodicals relating to
the insurance industry.

AIR WORLDWIDE CORPORATION
131 Dartmouth Street
Boston, MA 02116
Tel: 617-267-6645
Fax: 617-267-8284
Web: www.air-worldwide.com
Risk modeling and technology firm that
develops models of global natural hazards,
enabling companies to identify, quantify
and plan for the financial consequences of
catastrophic events.

AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
INSURANCE SERVICES
1745 South Naperville Road
Wheaton, IL 60189-8132
Tel: 630-681-8347; 800-564-AAIS
Fax: 630-681-8356
Web: www.aaisonline.com
Rating, statistical and advisory
organization, made up principally of
small and medium-sized property/casualty
companies.

	

One Financial Plaza
Hartford, CT 06103-2627
Tel: 860-299-2000
Web: www.conningresearch.com
Research and consulting firm that offers
a growing array of specialty information
products, insights and analyses of key
issues confronting the insurance industry.

EQECAT
475 14th Street, 5th Floor, Suite 550
Oakland, CA 94612-1900
Tel: 510-817-3100
Web: www.eqecat.com
Provider of products and services for
managing natural and man-made
risks. Provides innovative catastrophe
management solutions for property
and casualty insurance underwriting,
accumulation management and transfer of
natural hazard and terrorism risk.

FITCH CREDIT RATING COMPANY
One State Street Plaza
New York, NY 10004
Tel: 212-908-0500
Fax: 212-480-4435
Web: www.fitchratings.com
Assigns claims-paying ability ratings to
insurance companies.

HIGHLINE DATA LLC
One Alewife Center, Suite 460
Cambridge, MA 02140
Tel: 877-299-9424
Fax: 617-864-2396
Web: www.highlinedata.com
An information and data services company
comprised of two principal product
lines: National Underwriter Insurance
Data Services and Highline Banking Data
Services.

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	159

 
Directories

INSURANCE ADVISORY
BOARD C/O THE CORPORATE
EXECUTIVE BOARD
1919 North Lynn Street
Arlington, VA 22209
Tel: 571-303-3000
Fax: 571-303-3100
Web: www.insuranceadvisoryboard.com
Membership organization of senior
executives committed to sharing insights
and strategies for addressing common
challenges in the life and property/casualty
(general) insurance markets.

INSURANCE RESEARCH COUNCIL
(A DIVISION OF THE AMERICAN
INSTITUTE FOR CPCU)
718 Providence Road, PO Box 3025
Malvern, PA 19355-0725
Tel: 610-644-2212
Fax: 610-640-5388
Web: www.ircweb.org
Provides the public and the insurance
industry with timely research information
relevant to public policy issues affecting
risk and insurance.

ISO
545 Washington Boulevard
Jersey City, NJ 07310-1686
Tel: 800-888-4476
Fax: 201-748-1472
Web: www.iso.com
Provider of products and services that help
measure, manage and reduce risk. Provides
data, analytics and decision-support
solutions to professionals in many fields,
including insurance, finance, real estate,
health services, government and human
resources.

MOODY’S INVESTORS SERVICE
7 World Trade Center at 250 Greenwich
Street
New York, NY 10007
Tel: 212-553-1653
Fax: 212-553-0882
Web: www.moodys.com
Global credit analysis and financial
information firm.

MSB
2885 South Calhoun Road
New Berlin, WI 53151
Tel: 262-780-2800; 800-809-0016
Fax: 262-780-0306
Web: www.msbinfo.com
Building cost research company providing
data and estimating technologies to the
property insurance industry.

NATIONAL INDEPENDENT
STATISTICAL SERVICE
3601 Vincennes Road, PO Box 68950
Indianapolis, IN 46268
Tel: 317-876-6200
Fax: 317-876-6210
Web: www.niss-stat.org
National statistical agent and advisory
organization for all lines of insurance,
except workers compensation.

RAND INSTITUTE FOR CIVIL JUSTICE
1776 Main Street, PO Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Tel: 310-393-0411
Fax: 310-451-6979
Web: www.rand.org/centers/icj
Organization formed within The Rand
Corporation to perform independent,
objective research and analysis concerning
the civil justice system.

160 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Directories

RISK MANAGEMENT
SOLUTIONS, INC.
7015 Gateway Boulevard
Newark, CA 94560
Tel: 510-505-2500
Fax: 510-505-2501
Web: www.rms.com
Provides products and services for the
quantification and management of
catastrophe risk associated with natural
perils as well as products for weather
derivatives and enterprise risk management
for the property/casualty insurance
industry.

SNL FINANCIAL LC
One SNL Plaza, PO Box 2124
Charlottesville, VA 22902
Tel: 434-977-1600
Fax: 434-977-4466
Web: www.snl.com
Research firm that collects, standardizes
and disseminates all relevant corporate,
financial, market and M&A data as well
as news and analytics for the industries
it covers: banking, specialized financial
services, insurance, real estate and energy.

Monitors the credit quality of bonds and
other financial instruments of corporations,
governments and supranational entities.

THE STREET.COM
14 Wall Street, 15th floor
New York, NY 10005
Web: www.thestreet.com/
Evaluates the strength of insurance and
financial services firms.

WARD GROUP
11500 Northlake Drive, Suite 305
Cincinnati, OH 45249-1662
Tel: 513-791-0303
Fax: 513-985-3442
Web: www.wardinc.com
Management consulting firm specializing
in the insurance industry.

SOCIETY OF INSURANCE RESEARCH
631 Eastpointe Drive
Shelbyville, IN 46176
Tel: 317-398-3684
Fax: 317-642-0535
Web: www.sirnet.org
Stimulates insurance research and fosters
exchanges among society members on
research methodology.

STANDARD & POOR’S
RATING GROUP
55 Water Street
New York, NY 10041
Tel: 212-438-1000
Web: www.standardandpoors.com

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	161

 
Alphabetical Index

al
c
i
t
e
ab
Alph ex of
Ind iations
c
Asso

State specific associations are not included
in this alphabetical index; for these, look
under individual state listings starting on
page 162.
A.M. Best Company Inc., 159
Acord, 147
The Actuarial Foundation, 145
Advantage Group, 134
Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety,
155
Agents for Change, 141
Air Worldwide Corporation, 159
America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP),
132
American Academy of Actuaries, 145
American Association of Crop Insurers, 148
American Association of Insurance Services,
159
American Association of Managing General
Agents, 141
American Bankers Association, 134
American Bankers Insurance Association,
134
The American College, 143
American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI),
132
American Financial Services Association,
134
American Institute for Chartered Property
Casualty Underwriters, 143

American Institute of Marine Underwriters,
152
American Insurance Association (AIA), 128
American Land Title Association, 158
American Nuclear Insurers, 153
American Prepaid Legal Services Institute,
152
American Tort Reform Association, 152
APIW: A Professional Association of
Women in Insurance, 153
Arbitration Forums, Inc., 152
Association of Financial Guaranty Insurors,
157
Association of Superintendents of
Insurance of Latin America, 149
Automobile Insurance Plans Service Office,
146
Axco Insurance Information Services, 149
Bank Administration Institute, 134
Bank for International Settlements, 134
Bank Insurance & Securities Association,
135
Bank Insurance Market Research Group,
135
Bankinsurance.com, 135
Captive Insurance Companies Association,
146
Casualty Actuarial Society, 145
Certified Automotive Parts Association, 146

162 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Alphabetical Index

Certified Financial Planner Board of
Standards, Inc., 135
CFA Institute, 143
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters
Society. See CPCU
Coalition Against Insurance Fraud, 147
College Savings Plans Network, 135
The Committee of Annuity Insurers, 135
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
136
Conference of State Bank Supervisors, 136
Conning Research and Consulting, Inc.,
159
Consumers Bankers Association, 136
The Council of Insurance Agents and
Brokers, 142
CPCU (Chartered Property Casualty
Underwriters) Society, 143
Crop Insurance Research Bureau, 148
Defense Research Institute, 152
DMA Financial Services Council, 136
Eastbridge Consulting Group, Inc., 136
Employee Benefit Research Institute, 136
EQECAT, 159
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC), 136
Federal Financial Institutions Examination
Council, 137
Federal Insurance Administration, 149
Federal Reserve, 137
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority,
137
Financial Markets Center, 137
The Financial Planning Association, 137
Financial Services Coordinating Council,
137
Financial Services Forum, 137
The Financial Services Industry Council, 75
Financial Services Roundtable, 137
Fitch Credit Rating Company, 159
Futures Industry Association, 137
	

Geneva Association, 149
Global Aerospace, Inc., 147
Global Association of Risk Professionals,
138
Group of North American Insurance
Enterprises, 145, 149
Griffith Insurance Foundation, 144
The Hedge Fund Association, 138
Highline Data Llc, 159
Highway Loss Data Institute, 155
Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of
America, Inc., 129, 142
Inland Marine Underwriters Association,
153
Institute for Business & Home Safety
(IBHS), 129, 155
Insurance Accounting and Systems
Association, Inc., 145
Insurance Advisory Board c/o the Corporate
Executive Board, 160
Insurance Committee for Arson Control,
148
Insurance Data Management Association,
Inc. (IDMA), 153
Insurance Industry Charitable Foundation,
147
Insurance Information Institute (I.I.I.), 129
Insurance Information Network of
California (IINC), 129
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
(IIHS), 156
Insurance Institute of America, Inc., 144
Insurance Library Association of Boston,
144
Insurance Marketplace Standards
Association, 138
Insurance Regulatory Examiners Society,
154
Insurance Research Council, 129, 160
Insurance Services Network, 150
Insured Retirement Foundation, 144
Integrated Benefits Institute, 158

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	163

 
Alphabetical Index

Intermediaries and Reinsurance
Underwriters Association, Inc., 154
International Association of Insurance
Fraud Agencies, Inc., 148
International Association of Insurance
Supervisors, 150
International Association of Special
Investigation Units, 148
International Federation of Risk and
Insurance Management Associations,
Inc., 150
International Finance and Commodities
Association, 138
International Insurance Society, Inc., 150
International Social Security Association,
150
International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, 138
International Trade Administration, 150
Investment Company Institute, 138
ISO, 130, 160
IVANS (Insurance Value Added Network
Services), 147
Kehrer-Limra, 138
Latin American Agents Association, 142
Latin American Association of Insurance
Agencies, 142
The Life and Health Insurance Foundation
for Education, 132
Life Insurance Settlement Association, 133
Lightning Protection Institute, 156
Limra International, 133
LOMA (Life Office Management
Association), 133
Loss Executives Association, 155
MIB, INC., 133
Michael White Associates, 138
Moody’s Investors Service, 160
Mortgage Bankers Association of America,
139
Mortgage Insurance Companies of America
(MICA), 139, 157

MSB, 160
Museum of American Financial History,
139
NASD, 139
National Academy of Social Insurance, 158
National African-American Insurance
Association, 154
National Alliance of Life Companies
(NALC), 133
National Arbitration Forum, 152
National Association for Fixed Annuities,
139
National Association of Federal Credit
Unions, 139
National Association of Health
Underwriters, 133
National Association of Independent
Insurance Adjusters, 146
National Association of Insurance and
Financial Advisors, 130, 142, 154
National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, 142
National Association of Insurance Women,
154
National Association of Investment
Professionals, 139
National Association of Mutual Insurance
Companies (NAMIC), 130
The National Association of Personal
Financial Advisors, 139
National Association of Professional
Insurance Agents (PIA), 130, 142
National Association of Professional Surplus
Lines Offices, Ltd., 130, 157
National Association of Public Insurance
Adjusters, 146
National Association of Surety Bond
Producers, 157
National Conference of Insurance Guaranty
Funds, 143
National Conference of Insurance
Legislators, 143
National Credit Union Administration, 140
National Crop Insurance Services, Inc., 149

164 	 I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook

 
Alphabetical Index

National Fire Protection Association, 156
National Futures Association, 140
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), 156
National Independent Statistical Service,
160
National Institute of Building Sciences, 156
National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB),
130, 148
National Organization of Life and Health
Insurance Guaranty Associations
(NOLHGA), 133
National Reverse Mortgage Lenders
Association, 140
National Risk Retention Association, 146
National Safety Council, 156
National Structured Settlements Trade
Association, 152
NCCI, 130, 131, 158
NeighborWorks Insurance Alliance, 147
New York Alliance Against Insurance Fraud,
148
Nonprofit Risk Management Center, 155
Office of Thrift Supervision, 140
Options Industry Council, 140
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), 151
Overseas Private Investment Corporation,
151
Pension Research Council, 140
Physician Insurers Association of America,
153
Professional Liability Underwriting Society
(PLUS), 153
Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America, 131
Property Insurance Plans Service Office, 154
Public Risk Management Association, 155
Rand Institute for Civil Justice, 160
Reinsurance Association of America, 132,
154
	

Retirement Income Industry Association,
140
Risk and Insurance Management Society,
Inc., 155
Risk Management Solutions, Inc., 161
School of Risk Management, Insurance and
Actuarial Science of the Tobin College of
Business at St. John’s University, 144
Securities and Exchange Commission, 141
Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association, 141
Self-Insurance Institute of America, 146
SIGMA, 151
SNL Financial LC, 161
Society of Actuaries, 145
Society of Certified Insurance Counselors,
144
Society of Financial Examiners, 144
Society of Financial Services Professionals,
141
Society of Insurance Research, 161
Society of Insurance Trainers and
Educators, 145
Society of Risk management Consultants,
155
Standard and Poor’s Rating Group, 161
Surety Association of America, 132, 157
Surety Information Office, 132, 157
TheStreet.com, 161
Topics, 151
TowerGroup, 141
U.S. Aviation Underwriters, Inc., 147
Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., 156
Vards/Morningstar, Inc., 141
Ward Group, 161
Weather Risk Management Association
(WRMA), 158
Workers Compensation Research Institute,
158
World Fact Book, 151

I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 165

 
State Organizations

State
Organizations
Alabama
State Associations
NAIFA — Alabama
2820 Fairlane Drive, Suite A-1
Montgomery, Alabama 36116-1637
Tel: 334-271-4900
Fax: 334-271-4960
Web: www.naifa-alabama.com

Agent Associations

Professional Insurance
Agents of Alaska
See PIA of Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Arizona
State Associations
Arizona Insurance Council
PO Box 27006
Scottsdale, Arizona 85255
Tel: 602-996-7009
Fax: 602-996-7016
Web: www.azinsurance.org

Alabama Independent
Agents Association, Inc.

National Association of
Insurance and Financial
Advisors (NAIFA – Arizona)

141 London Parkway
Birmingham, Alabama 35211
Tel: 205-326-4129
Fax: 205-326-3086
Web: www.aiia.org

PO Box 4728
Scottsdale, Arizona 85261-4728
Tel: 480-661-6393
Fax: 480-661-6743
Web: www.naifa-az.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Alabama

Agent Associations

3805 Crestwood Parkway, Suite 140
Duluth, Georgia 30096
Tel: 770-921-7585; 800-233-4902
Fax: 770-921-7590
Web: www.piaal.com

Alaska
No State Associations
Agent Associations
Alaska Independent Insurance
Agents & Brokers, Inc.
701 W. 41st Avenue, Suite 103
Anchorage, Alaska 99503
Tel: 907-349-2500
Fax: 907-349-1300
Web: www.aiiab.org

Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of Arizona, Inc.
333 E. Flower Street
Phoenix, Arizona 85012
Tel: 602-956-1851
Fax: 602-468-1392
Web: www.iiabaz.com

Professional Insurance
Agents of Arizona
See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)
Western Insurance Agents
Association (WIAA)
See Western Insurance Agents
Association (under California)

166 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org	/insurancehandbook

 
State Organizations

Other Organizations

California

The Surplus Line
Association of Arizona

State Associations

15849 N. 71st St., Suite 100
Scottsdale, Arizona 85254
Tel: 602-279-6344
Fax: 602-222-9332
Web: www.sla-az.org

Association of California
Insurance Companies

Arkansas

1415 L Street, Suite 670
Sacramento, California 95814-3972
Tel: 916-449-1370
Fax: 916-449-1378
Web: www.acicnet.org

State Associations

Association of California Life and
Health Insurance Companies

The National Association
of Insurance and
Financial Advisors (NAIFA – Arkansas)
650 Edgewood Drive, Suite 201
Maumelle, Arkansas 72113
Tel: 501-851-6617
Fax: 501-851-1126
Web: http://arkansas.naifa.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Arkansas
5000 North Shore Drive
North Little Rock, Arkansas 72118
Tel: 501-221-2444
Fax: 501-221-0364
Web: www.iiaar.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Arkansas
10 Corporate Hill, Suite 130
Little Rock, Arkansas 72205
Tel: 501-225-1645
Fax: 501-225-2550
Web: www.piaar.com

	

1201 K Street, Suite 1820
Sacramento, California 95814
Tel: 916-442-3648
Fax: 916-442-1730
Web: www.aclhic.com

Insurance Information Network
of California (IINC)
900 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 1414
Los Angeles, California 90017
Tel: 213-624-IINC
Fax: 213-624-4432
Web: www.iinc.org

National Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors —
California (NAIFA – California)
1451 River Park Drive, Suite 175
Sacramento, California 95815-4520
Tel: 916-646-8600
Fax: 916-646-8130
Web: www.naifacalifornia.org

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	167

 
State Organizations

Pacific Association of Domestic
Insurance Companies (PADIC)

Surplus Line Association
of California

1940 Burlin Way
Auburn, California 95603
Tel: 530-888-6045
Fax: 530-888-6435

(Stamping Office)
50 California Street, 18th Fl.
San Francisco, California 94111
Tel: 415-434-4900
Fax: 415-434-3716
Web: www.slacal.org

Personal Insurance
Federation of California
1201 K Street, Suite 1220
Sacramento, California 95814
Tel: 916-442-6646
Fax: 916-446-9548
Web: www.pifc.org

Agent Associations
Professional Insurance
Agents of California
See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Western Insurance Agents
Association (WIAA)
(Serving Arizona, California, Colorado,
Nevada and New Mexico)
11190 Sun Center Drive, Suite 100
Rancho Cordova, California 95670
Tel: 916-443-4221; 800-553-4221
Fax: 916-443-5559
Web: www.wiaagroup.org

Other Organizations

Colorado
State Associations
NAIFA — Colorado
Lundy Enterprises
PO Box 271273
Louisville, Colorado 80027
Tel: 303-283-6001
Fax: 303-362-5809
Web: www.naifa-colorado.org

Rocky Mountain Insurance
Information Association —
CO, NM, UT and WY
7951 E. Maplewood Avenue, Suite 130
Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111
Tel: 303-790-0216/800-355-9524
Fax: 303-790-0433
Web: www.rmiia.org

Agent Associations
Insurance Brokers & Agents
of The West (IBA West)

Professional Independent
Insurance Agents of Colorado
&Agents Service Corporation

7041 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 290
Pleasanton, California 94566
Tel: 800-772-8998 or 925-426-3300
Fax: 925-484-6014
Web: www.ibawest.com

1660 Tower, 1660 S. Albion St., Suite 518
Denver, Colorado 80222
Tel: 303-512-0627
Fax: 303-512-0575
Web: www.piiac.com

168 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Other Organizations

Delaware

Surplus Line Association
of Colorado

State Associations

PO Box 1500
Denver, Colorado 80201
Tel: 303-331-9399
Fax: 303-331-9006
Web: www.colosla.org

NAIFA — Delaware
646 Plaza Drive
Newark, Delaware 19702
Tel: 302-283-1880
Fax: 302-283-1885
Web: www.naifanet.com/delaware

Connecticut

Agent Associations

State Associations

Independent Insurance
Agents of Delaware

Insurance Association
of Connecticut
21 Oak Street #607
Hartford, Connecticut 06106-8003
Tel: 860-547-0610
Fax: 860-547-0615

See Insurance Agents & Brokers
(under Pennsylvania)

District Of Columbia
State Associations

NAIFA of Connecticut, Inc.
15 Chipmunk Lane
Norwalk, Connecticut 06850
Tel: 203-866-4700
Fax: 203-866-1788
Web: www.naifa-ct.org

District of Columbia
Insurance Federation

Agent Associations

PO Box 34757
Washington, D.C. 20043
Tel: 202-797-0757
Fax: 202-797-0758
Web: www.dcif.org

Independent Insurance
Agents of Connecticut, Inc.

Agent Associations

30 Jordan Lane
Wethersfield, Connecticut 06109
Tel: 860-563-1950
Fax: 860-563-6730
Web: www.iiact.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of D.C.
See PIA (under Virginia)

Professional Insurance
Agents of Connecticut
See PIA (under New York)

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	169

 
State Organizations

Florida

Georgia

State Associations

State Associations

Florida Insurance Council

Georgia Association of Insurance and
Financial Advisors (NAIFA – Georgia)

2888 Remington Green Lane, Suite A
Tallahassee, Florida 32308
Tel: 850-386-6668
Fax: 850-386-7371
Web: www.flains.org

NAIFA—Florida
1836 Hermitage Blvd., #200
Tallahassee, Florida 32308-7706
Tel: 850-422-1701
Fax: 850-422-2762
Web: www.faifa.org

Agent Associations
Florida Association of
Insurance Agents (FAIA)
3159 Shamrock South
PO Box 12129
Tallahassee, Florida 32317-2129
Tel: 850-893-4155
Fax: 850-668-2852
Web: www.faia.com

Professional Insurance
Agents of Florida, Inc.
1390 Timberlane Road
Tallahassee, Florida 32312
Tel: 850-893-8245
Fax: 850-893-8316
Web: www.piafl.org

Other Organizations
Florida Surplus Lines Association
PO Box 331444
Atlantic Beach, Florida 32233-1444
Tel: 904-631-1322
Fax: 904-270-1198
Web: www.FloridaSurplusLinesAssociation.
com

677 Main Street
Suwanee, Georgia 30024
Tel: 770-455-4459; 800-422-0773
Fax: 770-455-4469
Web: www.naifageorgia.org

Georgia Association of Property/
Casualty Insurance Companies
PO Box 1
Gainesville, Georgia 30503
Tel: 770-535-4001
Fax: 770-532-7361

Georgia Insurance
Information Service
1225 Johnson Ferry Rd., Suite 330
Marietta, Georgia 30068
Tel: 770-565-3806; 770-317-5749
Web: www.giis.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Georgia, Inc.
3186 Chestnut Drive Connector
Doraville, Georgia 30340
Tel: 770-458-0093
Fax: 770-458-8007
Web: www.iiag.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Georgia
3805 Crestwood Parkway, Suite 140
Duluth, Georgia 30096
Tel: 770-921-2578; 800-233-4902
Fax: 770-921-7590
Web: www.piaga.com

170 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Hawaii

NAIFA — Idaho

State Associations
Hawaii Insurers Council
1003 Bishop Street
Suite 2010 Pauahi Tower
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813
Tel: 808-525-5877
Fax: 808-525-5879
Web: www.hawaiiinsurerscouncil.org

NAIFA Hawaii
516 Kawaihae Street, #E
Honolulu, Hawaii 96825
Tel: 808-394-3451

7684 Remuda Drive
Boise, Idaho 83709
Tel: 208-362-4953; 208-287-4433
Fax: 208-362-3580
Web: www.naifanet.com/idaho

NW Insurance Council
(Serving Idaho, Oregon and Washington)
101 Elliott Avenue West, Suite 520
Seattle, Washington 98119
Tel: 206-624-3330; Helpline: 800-664-4942
Fax: 206-624-1975
Web: www.nwinsurance.org

Agent Associations

Agent Associations
Hawaii Independent Insurance
Agents Association
84 N. King Street, 2nd Floor
Honolulu, Hawaii 96817
Tel: 808-531-3125
Fax: 808-531-9995

Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of Idaho, Inc.
595 South 14th
Boise, Idaho 83702
Tel: 208-342-9326
Fax: 208-336-2901
Web: www.iiabi.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Idaho

Other Organizations
Hawaii Insurance Bureau, Inc.
715 South King Street, Suite 320
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813
Tel: 808-531-2771
Fax: 808-536-3516
Web: www.hibinc.com

See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Other Organizations
Idaho Surveying &
Rating Bureau, Inc.

State Associations

1871 South Cobalt Point Way
Meridian, Idaho 83642
Tel: 208-343-5483
Fax: 208-895-8059
Web: www.isrb.com

Idaho Insurance Council

Surplus Line Association of Idaho, Inc.

Idaho

1408 Brooklawn Dr.
Boise, Idaho 83709-2049
Tel: 208-850-2342
Web: www.iiabi.org

(Stamping Office)
595 South 14th Street
Boise, Idaho 83702
Tel: 208-336-2901
Fax: 208-336-2901
Web: www.idahosurplusline.org
	

I.I.I. Insurance Handbook   www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 171

 
State Organizations

Illinois
State Associations
NAIFA — Illinois
60 Adloff Lane
Springfield, Illinois 62703
Tel: 217-529-0126; 800-543-9961
Fax: 217-529-0977
Web: www.naifa-il.com

Illinois Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies
PO Box 116
Ohlman, Illinois 62076
Tel: 217-563-8300
Fax: 888-403-0935
Web: www.iamic.org

Illinois Insurance Association
Illinois Insurance Hotline
217 East Monroe Street, Suite 110
Springfield, Illinois 62701
Tel: 217-789-1010
Fax: 217-789-6559
Web: www.illinoisinsurance.org

Illinois Life Insurance Council
600 South Second, Suite 401
Springfield, Illinois 62704
Tel: 217-544-1637
Fax: 217-544-6604

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Illinois (IIA of IL)
4360 Wabash Avenue
Springfield, Illinois 62711
Tel: 217-793-6660; 800-628-6436
Fax: 217-793-6744
Web: www.iiaofillinois.org

Other Organizations
Surplus Line Association of Illinois
100 S. Wacker Drive, Ste. 350
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Tel: 312-263-1993
Fax: 312-263-1996
Web: www.slai.org

Indiana
State Associations
Indiana Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors (INAIFA)
3009 East 96th Street
Indianapolis, Indiana 46240
Tel: 317-844-6268
Fax: 317-844-7659
Web: www.naifa-indiana.org

Insurance Institute of Indiana, Inc.
201 N. Illinois Street, Suite 1410
Indianapolis, Indiana 46204
Tel: 317-464-2450
Fax: 317-464-2460
Web: www.insuranceinstitute.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Indiana, Inc.
3435 West 96th Street
Indianapolis, Indiana 46268
Tel: 317-824-3780; 800-438-4424
Fax: 317-824-3786
Web: www.bigi.org

172 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Iowa

Kansas Association of Property
&Casualty Insurance Companies

State Associations

800 SW Jackson, Suite 900
Topeka, Kansas 66612-1259
Tel: 785-232-0545
Fax: 785-232-0005

Iowa Insurance Institute
215 10th St., Suite 1300
Des Moines, Iowa 50309
Tel: 515-288-2500
Fax: 515-43-0654
Web: http://iowains.com

Kansas Life Insurance Association
800 SW Jackson, Suite 900
Topeka, Kansas 66612-1259
Tel: 785-232-0545
Fax: 785-232-0005

Federation of Iowa Insurers
700 Walnut, Suite 1600
Des Moines, Iowa 50309
Tel: 515-283-8023
Fax: 515-283-3108
Web: www.federationofiowainsurers.com

National Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors (IOWA)
409 Washington Street, Suite A
Cedar Falls, Iowa 50613
Tel: 866-632-1491
Fax: 703-342-0386
Web: www.naifaiowa.org

Agent Associations
Kansas Association of
Insurance Agents
815 S.W. Topeka Blvd.
Topeka, Kansas 66612
Tel: 785-232-0561
Fax: 785-232-6817
Web: www.kaia.com

Kentucky
State Associations

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents of Iowa
4000 Westown Parkway
West Des Moines, Iowa 50266
Tel: 515-223-6060
Fax: 515-222-0610
Web: www.iiaiowa.org

Insurance Institute of Kentucky
PO Box 54542
Lexington, Kentucky 405554542Tel: 859-543-9759
Fax: 859-263-0497
Web: www.iiky.org

NAIFA – Kentucky
12808 Townepark Way, Suite 200
Louisville, Kentucky 40243
Tel: 502-244-0150
Fax: 502-244-3111
Web: www.naifakentucky.org

Kansas
State Associations
National Association
of Insurance and
Financial Advisors of Kansas 825
S. Kansas, Suite 500Topeka, Kansas
66612Tel: 785-354-7770
Fax: 785-233-2206
Web: www.kansasaifa.org
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	173

 
State Organizations

Kentucky Insurance Council
c/o Independent Insurance
Agents of Kentucky, Inc.
13265 O’Bannon Station Way
Louisville, Kentucky 40223
Tel: 502-245-5432; 866-426-4425
Fax: 502-245-5750
Web: www.iiak.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Kentucky, Inc.
13265 O’Bannon Station Way
Louisville, Kentucky 40223
Tel: 502-245-5432; 866-426-4425
Fax: 502-245-5750
Web: www.iiak.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Kentucky
107 Consumer Lane
Frankfort, Kentucky 40601
Tel: 502-875-3888
Fax: 502-227-0839
Web: www.piaky.org

Other Organizations
Kentucky Surplus Lines Association
c/o Risk Placement Services, Inc.
PO Box 14032
Lexington, Kentucky 40512-4032
Tel: 859-245-2500
Fax: 859-272-9622
Web: www.rpslex.com

Louisiana
State Associations
Louisiana Insurers Conference
450 Laurel Street, Suite 1400
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70801
Tel: 225-343-2776
Fax: 225-344-1132
Web: www.lainsconf.org

NAIFA — Louisiana
5526 Galeria Drive
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70816
Tel: 225-293-5258
Fax: 225-292-3394
Web: www.naifalouisiana.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
and Brokers of Louisiana, Inc.
9818 Bluebonnet Boulevard
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70810
Tel: 225-819-8007
Fax: 225-819-8027

Professional Insurance
Agents of Louisiana, Inc.
8064 Summa Avenue, Suite C
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70809
Tel: 225-766-7770; 800-349-3434
Fax: 225-766-1601
Web: www.piaoflouisiana.com

Other Organizations
Louisiana Surplus Line Association
PO Box 446
Mandeville, Louisiana 70470-0446
Tel: 985-792-4798
Fax: 985-792-4796
Web: www.lsla.bizland.com

174 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Agent Associations

Property Insurance Association
of Louisiana (Independent
Rating Bureau)

Independent Insurance
Agents of Maryland, Inc.

433 Metairie Road, Suite 203
Metairie, Louisiana 70005
Tel: 504-836-7980
Fax: 504-831-3444
Web: www.pial.org

2408 Peppermill Drive, Suite A
Glen Burnie, Maryland 21061-3257
Tel: 410-766-0600; 800-544-3368
Fax: 410-766-0993
Web: www.iiamd.org

Maine

NAIFA — Maryland
9 State Circle, Suite 303
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Tel: 877-304-9934
Fax: 443-458-0444
Web: www.naifa-maryland.org

State Associations
National Association of
Insurance and Financial
Advisors (NAIFA – Maine)
PO Box 2695 Bangor, Maine 04402-2695
Tel: 207-945-4766
Fax: 207-941-0241
Web: www.naifa-me.org

Agent Associations
Maine Insurance Agents Association
432 Western Avenue
Augusta, Maine 04330
Tel: 207-623-1875
Fax: 207-626-0275
Web: www.maineagents.com

Massachusetts
State Associations
Life Insurance Association
of Massachusetts
501 Boylston Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02116
Tel: 617-375-9200
Fax: 617-375-1029

Massachusetts Insurance
Federation, Inc.
Two Center Plaza, 8th Floor
Boston, Massachusetts 02108
Tel: 617-557-5538
Fax: 617-557-5675
Web: www.massinsurance.org

Maryland
State Associations
League of Life & Health
Insurers of Maryland

Agent Associations

200 Duke of Gloucester Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Tel: 410-269-1554
Fax: 410-268-0612

Massachusetts Association
of Insurance Agents
91 Cedar Street
Milford, Massachusetts 01757
Tel: 508-634-2900; 800-972-9312
Fax: 508-634-2929
Web: www.massagent.com

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	175

 
State Organizations

Association Headquarters — NAIFA
Massachusetts & New Hampshire
PO Box 500
Hingham, Massachusetts 02043
Tel: 617-266-1919; 800-480-8719 (In state)
Fax: 617-266-6849
Web: www.naifamass.org

Michigan
State Associations
Insurance Institute of Michigan
334 Townsend Street
Lansing, Michigan 48933
Tel: 517-371-2880
Fax: 517-371-2882
Web: www.iiminfo.org

Life Insurance Association
of Michigan
334 Townsend Street
Lansing, Michigan 48933
Tel: 517-482-7058
Fax: 517-482-5405

NAIFA — Michigan
240 S. Bridge Street, Suite 210
DeWitt, Michigan 48820
Tel: 517-668-3960
Fax: 517-668-3961
Web: www.naifanet.com/michigan

Agent Associations
Michigan Association of
Insurance Agents
1141 Centennial Way (48917)
PO Box 80620
Lansing, Michigan 48908-0620
Tel: 517-323-9473
Fax: 517-323-1629
Web: www.michagent.org

Other Organizations
Michigan Surplus Lines Association
215 Lakeview
Grosse Pointe Farms, Michigan 48236
Tel: 313-446-9636
Fax: 313-446-9706
Web: www.gossllc.com

Minnesota
State Associations
Insurance Federation of Minnesota
15490-101st Ave.
North Maple Grove, Minnesota 55369
Tel: 651-292-1099
Fax: 763-322-8831
Web: www.insurancefederation.org

Minnesota Association
of Farm Mutual Insurance
Companies Inc. (MAFMIC)
601 Elm Street East
PO Box 880
St. Joseph, Minnesota 56374
Tel: 320-271-0909
Fax: 320-277-0912
Web: www.mafmic.org

The National Association of
Insurance andFinancial Advisors
( NAIFA – Minnesota)
1405 North Lilac Drive, Suite 121
Golden Valley, Minnesota 55422
Tel: 763-544-8087
Fax: 763-544-1631
Web: www.naifa-mn.org

176 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Agent Associations

Other Organizations

Minnesota Independent
Insurance Agents & Brokers

Mississippi State Rating Bureau

7500 Flying Cloud Drive, Suite 900
Eden Prairie, Minnesota 55344
Tel: 800-864-3846 or 952-835-4180
Fax: 952-835-4774
Web: www.miia.org

2685 Crane Ridge Drive
PO Box 5231
Jackson, Mississippi 39296-5231
Tel: 601-981-2915
Fax: 601-981-2924
Web: www.msratingbureau.com

Mississippi

Missouri

State Associations

State Associations

National Association of
Insurance and Financial Advisors
– Mississippi (NAIFA)

NAIFA – Missouri

5475 Executive Place
Jackson, Mississippi 39206
Tel: 601-981-1522
Fax: 601-981-2745
Web: www.naifams.org

722 E. Capitol Avenue
Jefferson City, Missouri 65101
Tel: 888-634-5202
Fax: 573-634-5954
Web: www.naifamo.org

Missouri Insurance Coalition

Mississippi Life Companies Association
PO Box 78
Jackson, Mississippi 39205
Tel: 601-981-5332 x1461
Fax: 601-321-2931

220 Madison Street, 3rd Floor
Jefferson City, Missouri 65101
Tel: 573-893-4241
Fax: 573-893-4996
Web: www.moinsurancecoalition.com

Agent Associations

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
of Mississippi (IIAM)
124 Riverview Drive
Flowood, Mississippi 39232-8908
Tel: 601-939-9909; 800-898-0821
Fax: 601-939-9553
Web: www.msagent.org

Missouri Association of
Insurance Agents
2701 Industrial Drive
PO Box 1785
Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-1785
Tel: 573-893-4301; 800-617-3658
Fax: 573-893-3708
Web: www.missouriagent.org

Professional Insurance Agents
Association of Mississippi
4 River Bend Place, Suite 115
Jackson, Mississippi 39232
Tel: 601-936-6474; 800-898-0136
Fax: 601-936-6477
Web: www.piams.com
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	177

 
State Organizations

Montana

Nebraska

State Associations

State Associations

NAIFA Montana

National Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors –
Nebraska (NAIFA – Nebraska)

PO Box 2950
Bigfork, Montana 59911
Tel: 406-837-7254
Fax: 406-837-7255
Web: www.naifamt.org

Agent Associations

1633 Normandy Court, Suite A
Lincoln, Nebraska 68512
Tel: 402-474-7723
Fax: 402-476-6547
Web: www.naifa-ne.org

Independent Insurance Agents
Association of Montana, Inc.

Nebraska Insurance
Information Service

3131 Dredge Drive
Helena, Montana 59602
Tel: 406-442-9555
Fax: 406-442-8263
Web: www.iiamt.org
Professional Insurance Agents of Montana
See PIA of Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Other Organizations
Montana Surplus Lines
Agents Association
3131 Dredge Drive
Helena, Montana 59602
Tel: 406-443-7324
Fax: 406-442-8263
Web: www.mslaa.org

PO Box 81529
1220 Lincoln MallLincoln, Nebraska 68501
Tel: 402-434-8364
Fax: 402-434-8302
Web: www.nebins.com

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Nebraska
8321 Northwoods Drive, Suite B
Lincoln, Nebraska 68505
Tel: 402-476-2951; 800-377-3985
Fax: 402-476-1586
Web: www.iian.org

Professional Insurance Agents
Association of Nebraska & Iowa
920 S. 107th Avenue, Suite 305
Omaha, Nebraska 68114
Tel: 402-392-1611; 877-717-2074
Fax: 402-392-2228
Web: www.pianebraska.com

178 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Nevada

New Hampshire

State Associations

State Associations

Nevada Insurance Council

Association Headquarters –
NAIFA – Mass. & NH

PO Box 30367
Las Vegas, Nevada 89173-0367
Tel: 702-355-9007
Fax: 702-541-8615
Web: www.Nevadainsurancecouncil.com

NAIFA — Nevada
1122 Alta Vista Ct.
Sparks, Nevada 89434
Tel: 775-358-9058
Fax: 775-358-9187
Web: www.naifanv.org

PO Box 500
Hingham, Massachusetts 02043
Tel: 617-266-1919; 800-480-8719 (In state)
Fax: 617-266-6849
Web: www.naifanh.org

New Hampshire Association
of Domestic Insurance
Companies (NHADIC)
Peerless Insurance Company
62 Maple Avenue
Keene, New Hampshire 03431
Tel: 603-357-9558
Fax: 603-358-4616

Agent Associations
Nevada Independent
Insurance Agents
310 North Stewart Street (89701)
PO Box 645
Carson City, Nevada 89702
Tel: 775-882-1366
Fax: 775-883-0524
Web: www.niia.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Nevada
See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of New Hampshire
125 Airport Road
Concord, New Hampshire 03301
Tel: 603-224-3965
Fax: 603-224-0550
Web: www.iianh.com

New Jersey

Western Insurance Agents
Association (WIAA)

State Associations

See Western Insurance Agents
Association (under California)

Insurance Council of New Jersey
820 Bear Tavern Road, Suite 303
Ewing, New Jersey 08628-1021
Tel: 609-882-4400
Fax: 609-538-1849
Web: www.icnj.org

New Jersey Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors (NJAIFA)
1 Distribution Way, Suite 202
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	179

 
State Organizations

Monmouth Junction, New Jersey 08852
Tel: 732-422-0748
Fax: 732-422-0842
Web: www.naifanj.com

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of New Jersey Inc.
2211 Whitehorse - Mercerville Road
PO Box 3230
Trenton, New Jersey 08619
Tel: 609-587-4333
Fax: 609-587-4515
Web: www.iiabnj.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of New Jersey
See PIA (under New York)

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of New Mexico, Inc.
1511 University Boulevard, N.E.
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102
Tel: 505-843-7231; 800-621-3978
Fax: 505-243-3367
Web: www.iianm.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of New Mexico
See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Western Insurance Agents
Association (WIAA)
See Western Insurance Agents
Association (under California)

New Mexico

New York

State Associations

State Associations

National Association
of Insurance and

Life Insurance Council
of New York, Inc.

Financial Advisors (NAIFA —
New Mexico)
7815 Eagle Rock Avenue NE
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87122
Tel: 505-797-9007
Fax: 505-797-9007
Web: www.naifa.org

Rocky Mountain Insurance
Information Association – NM
See RMIIA of CO, NM, UT and
WY (under Colorado)

551 Fifth Avenue, Floor 29New
York, New York 10176-0001
Tel: 212-986-6181
Fax: 212-986-6549
Web: www.licony.org

New York Insurance Association, Inc.
130 Washington AvenueAlbany,
New York 12210
Tel: 518-432-4227
Fax: 518-432-4220
Web: www.nyia.org

The New York Alliance Against
Insurance Fraud, Inc.
c/o New York Insurance Association, Inc.
130 Washington Avenue
Albany, New York 12210
Tel: 518-432-3576
Fax: 518-432-4220
Web: www.fraudny.org

180 	 I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook

 
State Organizations

North Carolina

NAIFA – New York State
38 Sheridan Avenue
Albany, New York 12210-2714
Tel: 518-462-5567
Fax: 518-462-5569
Web: www.naifanys.org

State Associations
Insurance Federation
of North Carolina
3605 Glenwood Avenue, Suite 220
Raleigh, North Carolina 27612
Tel: 919-834-9773
Fax: 919-834-9802
Web: www.insurancefederationnc.com

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of New York, Inc.
5784 Widewaters Parkway, 1st Floor
Dewitt, New York 13214
Tel: 800-962-7950; 315-432-9111
Fax: 888-432-0510
Web: www.iiabny.org

NAIFA North Carolina
875 Washington Street, S-1
Raleigh, North Carolina 27605-3252
Tel: 919-839-5828
Fax: 919-821-5743
Web: www.ncaifa.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of NY, NJ, CT, NH
25 Chamberlain Street
PO Box 997
Glenmont, New York 12077-0997
Tel: 800-424-4244
Fax: 888-225-6935
Web: www.pia.org

No Agent Associations
Other Organizations
North Carolina Rate Bureau

Other Organizations
Excess Line Association of New York
(Stamping Office)
One Exchange Plaza
55 Broadway, 29th Floor
New York, New York 10006-3728
Tel: 646-292-5500
Web: www.elany.org

PO Box 176010
Raleigh, North Carolina 27619-6010
Tel: 919-783-9790
Fax: 919-719-7400
Web: www.ncrb.org

North Dakota
State Associations
Association of North
Dakota Insurers (ANDI)
c/o Zuger Kirmis & Smith
316 N. Fifth Street, 6th Floor
PO Box 1695
Bismarck, North Dakota 58502-1695
Tel: 701-223-2711
Fax: 701-223-7387
Web: www.zkslaw.com

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	181

 
State Organizations

Agent Associations
National Association of Insurance
& Financial Advisors of North
Dakota (NAIFA—ND)
1811 East Thayer Avenue
PO Box 5010
Bismarck, North Dakota 58502
Tel: 701-258-9525
Fax: 701-222-0103
Web: www.naifa-nd.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of North Dakota
1211 Memorial Highway, Suite 6
Bismarck, North Dakota 58504
Tel: 701-223-5025
Fax: 701-223-9456
Web: www.piand.com

Ohio
State Associations
Association of Ohio Life
Insurance Companies
c/o Bricker & Eckler, LLP100
South 3rd Street
Columbus, Ohio 43215
Tel: 614-227-2300
Fax: 614-227-2390
Web: www.aolic.com

The National Association
of Insurance and Financial
Advisors — Ohio
17 South High Street, Suite 200
Columbus, Ohio 43215-3458
Tel: 614-228-4539
Fax: 614-221-1989
Web: www.naifaohio.org

Ohio Insurance Institute
172 East State Street, Suite 201
Columbus, Ohio 43215-4321
Tel: 614-228-1593
Fax: 614-228-1678
Web: www.ohioinsurance.org

Agent Associations
The Independent Insurance
Agents Association of Ohio, Inc.
1330 Dublin Road
PO Box 758
Columbus, Ohio 43216
Tel: 614-464-3100; 800-282-4424
Fax: 614-486-9797
Web: www.ohiobigi.com

Professional Insurance Agents
Association of Ohio, Inc.
600 Cross Pointe Road
Gahanna, Ohio 43230
Tel: 614-552-8000; 800-555-1742
Fax: 614-552-0115
Web: www.ohiopia.com

Oklahoma
State Associations
Association of Oklahoma Life
Insurance Companies
c/o Kerr, Irvine, Rhodes & Ables
201 Robert S. Kerr, #600
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73102
Tel: 405-272-9221
Fax: 405-236-3121
Web: www.kiralaw.com

NAIFA — Oklahoma
6051 N. Brookline, Suite 124
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73112
Tel: 405-810-1989; 800-491-8190
Fax: 405-810-1799
Web: www.okaifa.org

182 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Southwestern Insurance
Information Service (SIIS)

Professional Insurance
Agents of Oregon

See Southwestern Insurance
Information Service (under Texas)

See PIA Western Alliance
(under Washington)

Agent Associations

Pennsylvania

Independent Insurance
Agents of Oklahoma

State Associations

PO Box 13490
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73113
Tel: 405-840-4426
Fax: 405-840-4450
Web: www.iiaok.com

Insurance Federation
of Pennsylvania
1600 Market Street, Suite 1520
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103
Tel: 215-665-0500
Fax: 215-665-0540
Web: www.ifpenn.org

Oregon

NAIFA — Pennsylvania

State Associations
NW Insurance Council
(Serving Oregon, Washington and Idaho)
101 Elliott Avenue West, Suite 520
Seattle, Washington 98119
Tel: 206-624-3330
Fax: 206-624-1975
Web: www.nwinsurance.org

NAIFA — Oregon
12690 NW Lorraine Drive
Portland, Oregon 97229
Tel: 503-718-0094
Fax: 866-791-3348
Web: www.oraifa.org

777 East Park Drive, Suite 300
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17111
Tel: 717-234-2523, 800-552-7258
Fax: 717-234-5190
Web: www.naifa-pa.org

Pennsylvania Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies (PAMIC)
1017 Mumma Road, Suite 103
Wormleysburg, Pennsylvania 17043
Tel: 717-303-0197
Fax: 717-303-1501
Web: www.pamic.org

Agent Associations
Insurance Agents & Brokers

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of Oregon
5550 SW Macadam Avenue, Suite 305
Portland, Oregon 97239
Tel: 503-274-4000; 866-774-4226
Fax: 503-274-0062
Web: www.iiabo.org

	

5050 Ritter Road
PO Box 2023
Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania 17055
Tel: 717-795-9100
Fax: 717-795-8347

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	183

 
State Organizations

Other Organizations

South Carolina

Pennsylvania Surplus
Lines Association

State Associations

180 Sheree Blvd., Suite 3100
Exton, Pennsylvania 19341
Tel: 610-594-1340 or 888-2093230 (in state only)
Fax: 610-594-7623
Web: www.pasla.org

Puerto Rico
No State Associations
Agent Associations
Professional Insurance Agents of
Puerto Rico & the Caribbean, Inc.
PO Box 192389
San Juan, Puerto Rico 00919-2389
Tel: 787-792-7849
Fax: 787-792-4745

Rhode Island
No State Associations
Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Rhode Island

South Carolina Insurance
News Service
1301 Gervais Street, Suite 715
Columbia, South Carolina 29201
Tel: 803-252-3455
Fax: 803-779-0189
Web: www.scinsurance.net

The Association of South
Carolina Property/Casualty
Insurance Companies
c/o State Auto Insurance Companies
PO Box 199
Greer, South Carolina 29652
Tel: 864-877-3311
Fax: 864-879-4025
Web: www.stateauto.com

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
& Brokers of South Carolina
PO Box 21000
8800 Gracern Road
Columbia, South Carolina 29221
Tel: 803-731-9460
Fax: 803-772-6425
Web: www.iiabsc.com

2400 Post Road
Warwick, Rhode Island 02886
Tel: 401-732-2400
Fax: 401-732-1708
Web: www.iiari.com

South Dakota

NAIFA – RI

PO Box 1820
Sioux Falls, South Dakota 57101
Tel: 605-336-3400
Fax: 605-367-8998
Web: www.naifanet.com/southdakota

1643 Warwick Avenue, PMB 128
Warwick, Rhode Island 02889
Tel: 401-739-2977
Fax: 401-727-0959
Web: www.naifa-ri.org

State Associations
NAIFA – South Dakota

184 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Agent Associations

Texas

Independent Insurance Agents
of South Dakota (IIASD)

State Associations

PO Box 327305 Island Drive
Fort Pierre, South Dakota 57501
Tel: 605-224-6234
Fax: 605-224-6235
Web: www.iiasd.org

Association of Fire & Casualty
Companies of Texas
PO Box 15
Austin, Texas 78767-0015
Tel: 512-444-9611
Fax: 512-444-0734
Web: www.insurancecouncil.org

Tennessee

Insurance Council of Texas

State Associations
NAIFA – Tennessee189 Fairmont Drive
Murfreesboro, Tennessee 37129
Tel: 615-904-6013; 888-276-4159
Fax: 615-907-6389
Web: www.tnaifa.org

2801 South Interregional Highway
PO Box 15
Austin, Texas 78767-0015
Tel: 512-444-9611
Fax: 512-444-0734
Web: www.insurancecouncil.org

Southwestern Insurance
Information Service (SIIS)

Agent Associations
Insurors of Tennessee
2500 – 21st Avenue, Suite 200
Nashville, Tennessee 37212
Tel: 615-385-1898; 800-264-1898
Fax: 615-385-9303
Web: www.insurors.org

Professional Insurance
Agents of Tennessee, Inc.
504 Autumn Springs Court, Suite A-2
Franklin, Tennessee 37067
Tel: 615-771-1177
Fax: 615-771-3456
Web: www.piatn.com

8303 North Mopac, Suite B-231
Austin, Texas 78759
Tel: 512-795-8214
Fax: 512-795-2323
Web: www.siisinfo.org

National Association of Insurance
and Financial Advisors — Texas
515 Congress Avenue, Suite 1650
Austin, Texas 78701
Tel: 512-716-8800
Fax: 512-476-1932
Web: www.naifa-texas.org

Texas Association of Life
& Health Insurers
1001 Congress Avenue, Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78701
Tel: 512-472-6886
Fax: 512-476-2870
Web: www.talhi.com

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	185

 
State Organizations

Texas Coalition for Affordable
Insurance Solutions

Utah

500 West 13th Street
Austin, Texas 78701
Tel: (512) 477-7382
Fax: (512) 477-6240
Web: www.tcais.org

State Associations

Agent Associations

Agent Associations

Independent Insurance
Agents of Texas

The Utah Association of
Independent Insurance Agents

1115 San Jacinto, Suite 100 (78701)
PO Box 684487
Austin, Texas 78768-4487
Tel: 512-476-6281; 800-880-7428
Fax: 512-469-9512
Web: www.iiat.org

Texas Insurance Professionals,PIA
National Affiliate
PO Box 90908
Austin, Texas 78709-0908
Tel: 800-829-9838
Fax: 512-301-0265
Web: www.piatx.org

Other Organizations

Rocky Mountain Insurance
Information Association – UT
See RMIIA of CO, NM, UT and
WY (under Colorado)

4885 South 900 East, Suite 302
Salt Lake City, Utah 84117
Tel: 801-269-1200
Fax: 801-269-1265
Web: www.uaiia.org

Other Organizations
Surplus Line Association of Utah
(Stamping Office)
6711 South 1300 East
Salt Lake City, Utah 84121
Tel: 801-944-0114
Fax: 801-944-0116
Web: www.slaut.org

Surplus Lines Stamping
Office of Texas

Vermont

805 Las Cimas Parkway, Suite 150
Austin, Texas 78746
Tel: 512-346-3274
Fax: 512-346-3422
Web: www.slsot.org

State Associations

Texas Surplus Lines Association, Inc.
9020-I Capital of Texas
Highway North, Suite 370
Austin, Texas 78759
Tel: 512-343-9058
Fax: 512-343-2896
Web: www.tsla.org

National Association
of Insurance and
Financial Advisors ( NAIFA – Vermont)
325 Ethan Allen Pkwy
Burlington, Vermont 05401
Tel: 802-660-9639
Fax: 802-862-3466
Web: www.naifanet.com/vermont

186 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Vermont Association of
Domestic Property & Casualty
Insurance Companies

Metropolitan Washington
Association of Independent
Insurance Agents

c/o Union Mutual of Vermont Companies
139 State Street
Montpelier, Vermont 05602
Tel: 802-223-5261
Fax: 802-229-5580
Web: www.unionmutual.com

PO Box 25346
Alexandria, Virginia 22313-5346
Tel: 703-706-5446
Fax: 703-706-5445
Web: www.mwaiia.org

Agent Associations

Professional Insurance Agents
Association of Virginia & D.C.
8751 Park Central Drive, Suite 140
Richmond, Virginia 23227
Tel: 804-264-2582
Fax: 804-266-1075
Web: www.piavadc.com

Vermont Insurance Agents
Association, Inc.
PO Box 1387
47½ Court StreetMontpelier,
Vermont 05602
Tel: 802-229-5884
Fax: 802-223-0868
Web: www.viaa.org

NAIFA – Virginia

Virginia

3108 N. Parham Road, Suite 100A
Henrico, Virginia 23294-4415
Tel: 804-747-6020
Fax: 804-965-0823
Web: www.naifanet.com/virginia

State Associations

Other Organizations

NAIFA – Greater Washington D.C.

Virginia Surplus Lines Association

PO Box 5153
Arlington, Virginia 22205
Tel: 703-532-8778
Fax: 703-940-8393
Web: www.naifa-gwdc.org

c/o Atlantic Specialty Lines, Inc.
9020 Stony Point Parkway, Suite 450
Richmond, Virginia 23235
Tel: 804-320-9500
Fax: 804-320-7280

Agent Associations

Washington

Independent Insurance
Agents of Virginia, Inc.

State Associations

8600 Mayland Drive
Richmond, Virginia 23294
Tel: 804-747-9300 or 800-288-4428
Fax: 804-747-6557
Web: www.iiav.com

	

NW Insurance Council
(Serving Washington, Oregon and Idaho)
101 Elliott Avenue West, Suite 520
Seattle, Washington 98119
Tel: 206-624-3330;
Helpline: 800-664-4942
Fax: 206-624-1975
Web: www.nwinsurance.org

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	187

 
State Organizations

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
and Brokers of Washington
15015 Main Street, Suite 205 (98007)
PO Box 6459
Bellevue, Washington 98008
Tel: 425-649-0102
Fax: 425-649-8573
Web: www.wainsurance.org

PIA Western Alliance
Representing the affiliate chapters
of Washington/Alaska,
Oregon/Idaho, Montana and the
Group (AZ, NM, NV and CA)
3205 N.E. 78th Street, Suite 104
Vancouver, Washington 98665
Tel: 888-246-4466
Fax: 888-346-4466
Web: www.piawest.com

Other Organizations
Washington Insurance
Examining Bureau, Inc.
2101 4th Avenue, Suite 300
Seattle, Washington 98121-2329
Tel: 206-217-9432
Fax: 206-217-9329
Web: www.wieb.com

Surplus Line Association
of Washington
(Stamping Office)
600 University Street, Suite 1710
Seattle, Washington 98101-1129
Tel: 206-682-3409
Fax: 206-623-3326
Web: www.surpluslines.org

West Virginia
State Associations
West Virginia Insurance Federation
PO Box 11887
Charleston, West Virginia 25339
Tel: 304-357-9929
Fax: 304-357-0919
Web: www.wvinsurance.org

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance Agents
of West Virginia, Inc.
PO Box 1226 (25324-1226)
179 Summers Street, Suite
321Charleston, West Virginia 25301
Tel: 304-342-2440; 800-274-4298
Fax: 304-344-4492
Web: www.iiawv.org

Washington Surveying
& Rating Bureau
2101 4th Avenue, Suite 300
Seattle, Washington 98121-2329
Tel: 206-217-9772
Fax: 206-217-9329
Web: www.wsrb.com

188 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
State Organizations

Wisconsin

Wyoming

State Associations

State Associations

Community Insurance
Information Center

Rocky Mountain Insurance
Information Association – WY

700 W. Michigan Street, Suite 360
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53233-2470
Tel: 414-291-5360
Fax: 414-291-5370
Web: www.insuranceinfo-ciic.org

National Association
of Insurance and
Financial Advisors - Wisconsin
2702 International Lane., Suite 207
Madison, Wisconsin 53704
Tel: 608-244-3131
Fax: 608-244-0476
Web: http://wisconsin.naifa.org

Wisconsin Insurance Alliance
44 East Mifflin Street, Suite 901
Madison, Wisconsin 53703-2800
Tel: 608-255-1749
Fax: 608-255-2178
Web: www.wial.org

See RMIIA of CO, NM, UT and
WY (under Colorado)

Agent Associations
Association of Wyoming
Insurance Agents
PO Box 799
Sundance, Wyoming 82729-0799
Tel: 307-283-2052
Fax: 775-796-3122
Web: www.awia.com

NAIFA – Wyoming
Hampton Insurance & Financial Services
PO Box 319
Upton, Wyoming 82730
Tel: 307-468-2635
Fax: 307-468-2415

Agent Associations
Independent Insurance
Agents of Wisconsin
725 John Nolen Drive
Madison, Wisconsin 53713
Tel: 608-256-4429; 800-362-7441
Fax: 608-256-0170
Web: www.iiaw.com

Professional Insurance
Agents of Wisconsin, Inc.
6401 Odana Road
Madison, Wisconsin 53719
Tel: 608-274-8188
Fax: 608-274-8195
Web: www.piaw.org

	

I.I.I. Insurance Handbook   www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 189

 
Alphabetical Index

Brief ry
o
Hist

YEAR	
1601

EVENT
First insurance legislation in the United Kingdom was enacted. Modern insurance has its roots in
this law which concerned coverage for merchandise and ships.

1666

Great Fire of London demonstrated destructive power of fire in an urban environment, leading
entrepreneur Nicholas Barbon to form a business to repair houses damaged by fire.

1684

Participants in the Friendly Society in England formed a mutual insurance company to cover fire
losses.

1688

Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, the precursor of Lloyd’s of London, became the central meeting
place for ship owners seeking insurance for a voyage.

1696

Hand in Hand Mutual Fire Company was formed. Aviva, the world’s oldest continuously operating
insurance company, traces its origins to this company.

1710

Charles Povey formed the Sun, the oldest insurance company in existence which still conducts
business in its own name. It is the forerunner of the Royal & Sun Alliance Group.

1735

The Friendly Society, the first insurance company in the United States, was established in
Charleston, South Carolina. This mutual insurance company went out of business in 1740.

1752

The Philadelphia Contributionship for the Insurance of Houses from Loss by Fire, the oldest
insurance carrier in continuous operation in the United States, was established.

1759

Presbyterian Ministers Fund, the first life insurance company in the United States, was founded.

1762

Equitable Life Assurance Society, the world’s oldest mutual life insurer, was formed in England.

1776

Charleston Insurance Company and the South Carolina Insurance Company, the first two United
States marine insurance companies, were formed in South Carolina.

1779
1792

Lloyd’s of London introduced the first uniform ocean marine policy.
Insurance Company of North America, the first stock insurance company in the United States, was
established.

1813

Eagle Fire Insurance Company of New York assumed all outstanding risks of the Union Insurance
Company, in the first recorded fire reinsurance agreement in the United States.

1849
1850

New York passed the first general insurance law in the United States.
Franklin Health Assurance Company of Massachusetts offered the first accident and health
insurance.

1851

New Hampshire created the first formal agency to regulate insurance in the United States.

190 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
Alphabetical
Brief History
Index
YEAR	
1861
1866

EVENT	
First war-risk insurance policies were issued, written by life insurance companies during the Civil War.
National Board of Fire Underwriters was formed in New York City, marking the beginning of
insurance rate standardization.
Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company, the first boiler insurance company, was
established in Hartford, Connecticut.

1873

The Massachusetts Legislature adopted the first standard fire insurance policy.

1878

Fidelity and Casualty Company of New York began providing fidelity and surety bonds.

1885

Liability protection was first offered with the introduction of employers liability policies.

1890

First policies providing benefits for disabilities from specific diseases were offered.

1894

National Board of Fire Underwriters established Underwriters’ Laboratories to investigate and test
electrical materials to ensure they meet fire safety standards.

1898

Travelers Insurance Company issued the first automobile insurance policy in the United States.

1899

First pedestrian killed by an automobile, in New York City.

1910

New York passed the first United States workers compensation law. It was later found to be
unconstitutional.

1911

Wisconsin enacted the first permanent workers compensation law in the United States.

1912

Lloyd’s of London introduced aviation insurance coverage.

1925

Massachusetts passed the first compulsory automobile insurance legislation.
Connecticut passed the first financial responsibility law for motorists.

1938
1945

Federal Crop Insurance Act created the first federal crop insurance program.
McCarran-Ferguson Act (Public Law 15) was enacted. It provided the insurance industry with a
limited exemption to federal antitrust law, assuring the pre-eminence of state regulation of the
industry.

1947

New York established the Motor Vehicle Liability Security Fund to cover auto insurance company
insolvencies. This organization was a precursor of the state guaranty funds established by insurers
in all states to absorb the claims of insolvent insurers.

1950

First package insurance policies for homeowners coverage were introduced.

1960

Boston Plan was established to address insurance availability problems in urban areas in Boston.

1968

First state-run Fair Access to Insurance Requirements (FAIR) Plans were set up to ensure property
insurance availability in high-risk areas.
The federal flood insurance program was established with the passage of the National Flood
Insurance Act. It enabled property owners in communities that participate in flood reduction
programs to purchase insurance against flood losses.

1971
1981

Massachusetts became the first state to establish a true no-fault automobile insurance plan.
Federal Risk Retention Act of 1981 was enacted. The law fostered the growth of risk retention
groups and other nontraditional insurance mechanisms.
The Illinois Legislature created the Illinois Insurance Exchange, a cooperative effort of individual
brokers and risk bearers operating as a single market, similar to Lloyd’s of London.

1985

Mission Insurance Group failed. The insolvency incurred the largest payout by state guaranty
funds for a single property/casualty insurance company failure at that time. This and other
insolvencies in the 1980s led to stricter state regulation of insurer solvency.
	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	191

 
Brief
Alphabetical
History Index
YEAR	

EVENT
Montana became the first state to forbid discrimination by sex in the setting of insurance rates.

1992

European Union’s Third Nonlife Insurance Directive became effective, establishing a single
European market for insurance.

1996

Florida enacted rules requiring insurers to offer separate deductibles for hurricane losses, marking
a shift to hurricane deductibles based on a percentage of loss rather than a set dollar figure.
Catastrophe bonds, vehicles for covering disaster risk in the capital markets, were introduced.

1997

World Trade Organization agreement to dismantle barriers to trade in financial services, including
insurance, banking and securities, was signed by the United States and some 100 other countries.

1999

Financial Services Modernization Act (Gramm-Leach-Bliley) enacted, allowing insurers, banks and
securities firms to affiliate under a financial holding company structure.

2001

Terrorist attacks upon the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon in
Washington, D.C. caused about $40 billion in insured losses.
New York became the first state to ban the use of hand-held cell phones while driving.

2002

Terrorism Risk Insurance Act enacted to provide a temporary federal backstop for terrorism
insurance losses.

2003

In a landmark ruling, upheld in 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court placed limits on punitive damages,
holding in State Farm v. Campbell that punitive damages awards should generally not exceed
nine times compensatory awards.

2004

New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer and a number of state regulators launched investigations
into insurance industry sales and accounting practices.

2005

Citigroup sold off its Travelers life insurance unit, following the spin off of its property/casualty
business in 2002. This dissolved the arrangement that led to the passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley
in 1999.
The federal Class Action Fairness Act moved most class-action lawsuits to federal courts, offering
the prospect of lower defense costs and fewer and less costly verdicts.
A string of hurricanes, including Hurricane Katrina, hit the Gulf Coast, making 2005 the most
active hurricane season.
Congress passed legislation extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act to December 2007. The
act, originally passed in 2002, had been set to expire at the end of 2005. Extended again in 2007.

2006
2007

Massachusetts became the first state to pass a universal health insurance law.
Florida passed legislation shifting more of the cost of paying for hurricane damage from private
insurers to the state.
Washington became the first state to ban the practice of texting with a cellphone while driving.
Congress passes legislation extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act through the end of 2014.

2008

The Federal Reserve Bank acquired a 79 percent stake in American International Group (AIG) in
exchange for an $85 billion loan, which was subsequently increased and restructured.
Troubled Asset Relief Program established to stabilize the financial sector. Insurers that own a
federally regulated bank or thrift were eligible to participate.

2010

Congress enacted an overhaul of the nation’s health care system, expanding access to medical
insurance.

192 I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	

 
.
I.I.Ices
ur
o
s
e
R

I.I.I. Store
The I.I.I. Store is your gateway to a wide array of books and brochures from the Insurance
Information Institute. Print and PDF formats, and quantity discounts are available
for most products. Order online at www.iii.org/publications, call 212-346-5500 or email
publications@iii.org.

I.I.I. INSURANCE FACT BOOK
Thousands of insurance facts, figures, tables and graphs designed for quick and easy reference.

THE FINANCIAL SERVICES FACT BOOK
Banking, securities and insurance industry trends and statistics. Published jointly with the
Financial Services Roundtable. Online version available at www.financialservicesfacts.org

INSURANCE HANDBOOK
A guide to the insurance industry for reporters, public policymakers, students, insurance company
employees, regulators and others. Provides concise explanations of auto, home, life, disability and
business insurance, as well as issues papers, a glossary and directories. Online version available at
www.iii.org/insurancehandbook

INSURING YOUR BUSINESS:
A SMALL BUSINESSOWNERS’ GUIDE TO INSURANCE
A comprehensive insurance guide for small business owners. Special discounts available to
organizations and agents for bulk orders. Online version available at www.iii.org/smallbusiness

A FIRM FOUNDATION: HOW INSURANCE SUPPORTS THE ECONOMY
Shows the myriad ways in which insurance provides economic support—from offering
employment and fueling the capital markets, to providing financial security and income to
individuals and businesses. Provides national and state data. Selected state versions are also
available. Online version available at www.iii.org/economics

INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE FACT BOOK
Facts and statistics on the property/casualty and life insurance industries of dozens of countries.
No print edition. Available in CD-ROM format. Online version available at www.iii.org/international

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	193

 
I.I.l. Resources

COMMERCIAL INSURANCE
A comprehensive guide to the commercial insurance market—what it does, how it functions, and
its key players. No print edition. Online version available at www.iii.org/commerciallines

I.I.I. INSURANCE DAILY
Keeps thousands of readers up-to-date on important events, issues and trends in the insurance
industry each business morning. Transmitted early each business day via email.

KNOW YOUR STUFF
Free online home inventory software. Available in the store and at www.knowyourstuff.org

INSURANCE MATTERS
A guide to the insurance industry for policymakers. Available at www.iii-insurancematters.org

CONSUMER BROCHURES
Renters Insurance — All renters need to know about insurance
Am I Covered? — A guide to homeowners insurance
Your Home Inventory — Instructions on how to prepare an inventory of possessions to help
identify and calculate losses if a disaster strikes
Nine Ways to Lower Your Auto Insurance Costs — Tips on how to lower your auto insurance
costs
Settling Insurance Claims After a Disaster — Helps you understand how to file an insurance
claim after a disaster
Twelve Ways to Lower Your Homeowners Insurance Costs — Tips on how to lower your
homeowners insurance costs
...and many others

I.I.I. on the Web
Visit www.iii.org for a wealth of information for individuals and business, from consumer
brochures to issues papers to white papers to statistics.
  	 Become an I.I.I. fan on Facebook at www.facebook.com/InsuranceInformationInstitute
  	 Read about the industry in Claire Wilkinson’s blog, Terms and Conditions, at
www.iii.org/insuranceindustryblog
  	 Follow the I.I.I. website on Twitter at http://twitter.com/iii.org and on its special interest feeds:
http://www.iii.org/insuranceindustryblog/ —
	
to be alerted to updates to Terms and Conditions
http://twitter.com/III_Research —
to learn about updates to I.I.I. papers and studies
http://twitter.com/Bob_Hartwig —
for the latest from I.I.I. President, Robert Hartwig
http://twitter.com/JeanneSalvatore —
	
for commentary from I.I.I.’s Senior V.P. of Public Affairs
http://twitter.com/LWorters —
I.I.I.’s media connection
http://www.insuringflorida.org/blog —
to keep up on Florida insurancetrends

194 	 I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook

 
I.I.I. Member Companies
ACE USA
ACUITY
Aegis Insurance Services Inc.
Allianz of America, Inc.
Allied World Assurance Company
Allstate Insurance Group
American Agricultural Insurance Company
American Family Insurance Group
American Reliable Insurance
Amerisafe
Arthur J. Gallagher & Co.
Aspen Re
Auto Club South Insurance Company
Beazley Group plc
Bituminous Insurance Companies
Catholic Mutual Group
Catlin Inc.
Century Surety Company
Chartis
Chubb Group of Insurance Companies
Church Mutual Insurance Company
COUNTRY Financial
CNA
CUMIS Insurance Society, Inc.
DeSmet Farm Mutual Insurance Company of
South Dakota
Dryden Mutual Insurance Company
EMC Insurance Companies
Employers Insurance Group
Enumclaw Insurance Group
Erie Insurance Group
Farmers Group, Inc.
GEICO
Gen Re
Germania Insurance
Grange Insurance
GuideOne Insurance
The Hanover Insurance Group Inc.
Harbor Point Re Insurance U.S., Inc.
The Harford Mutual Insurance Companies
Harleysville Insurance
The Hartford Financial Services Group
Holyoke Mutual Insurance Company
The Horace Mann Companies
Ironshore Insurance Ltd.
James River Group, Inc.
Liberty Mutual Group
Lloyd’s

www.acelimited.com
www.acuity.com
www.aegislink.com
www.allianz.com
www.awac.com
www.allstate.com
www.aaic.com
www.amfam.com
www.assurant.com
www.amerisafe.com
www.ajg.com
www.aspen-re.com
www.aaasouth.com
www.beazley.com
www.bituminousinsurance.com
www.catholicmutual.org
www.catlin.com
www.centurysurety.com
www.chartisinsurance.com
www.chubb.com
www.churchmutual.com
www.countryfinancial.com
www.cna.com
www.cumis.com
www.desmetfarmmutual.com
www.drydenmutual.com
www.emcins.com
www.eig.com
www.mutualofenumclaw.com
www.erieinsurance.com
www.farmers.com
www.geico.com
www.genre.com
www.germania-ins.com
www.grangeinsurance.com
www.guideone.com
www.hanover.com
www.harborpoint.com
www.harfordmutual.com
www.harleysville.com
www.thehartford.com
www.holyokemutual.com
www.horacemann.com
www.ironshore.com
www.james-river-group.com
www.libertymutual.com
www.lloyds.com
Continued

	

I.I.I.	Insurance	Handbook			www.iii.org/insurancehandbook	 	195

 
I.I.I. Member Companies
Lockton Companies
Magna Carta Companies
Marsh Inc.
Max Capital Group Ltd.
MetLife Auto & Home
Michigan Millers Mutual Insurance Company
Millville Mutual Insurance Company
Missouri Employers Mutual Insurance
Munich Re
Nationwide
New York Central Mutual Fire Insurance Company
The Norfolk & Dedham Group
Ohio Mutual Insurance Group
OneBeacon Insurance Group
PartnerRe
Pennsylvania Lumbermens Mutual
Insurance Company
Providence Mutual Fire Insurance Company
Scor U.S. Corporation
SECURA Insurance Companies
Selective Insurance Group
State Auto Insurance Companies
State Compensation Insurance Fund of California
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company
The Sullivan Group
Swiss Reinsurance America Corporation
TIAA-CREF
Travelers
Unitrin Property and Casualty Insurance Group
USAA
Utica National Insurance Group
West Bend Mutual Insurance Company
Westfield Group
W. R. Berkley Corporation
X.L. America, Inc.
XL Insurance Company, Ltd.
Zurich North America
Associate Members
Deloitte
Farmers Mutual Fire Insurance of Tennessee
Florida Property and Casualty Association
Livingston Mutual Insurance Company
Mutual Assurance Society of Virginia
Randolph Mutual Insurance Company
Sompo Japan Research Institute, Inc.
Transunion Insurance Solutions

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________

Chapter 1
Insurance Concepts & Principles

______________________________________________________________________________

Chapter Objectives
Your learning objectives are as follows:
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?

Understand the mechanism of insurance.
Understand the difference between property and casualty insurance.
Learn the parts of the insurance contract
Know all of the insurance terms
Understand property insurance terms and concepts
Know the loss adjustment methods (replacement cost vs. actual cash value)
Understand casualty insurance terms and concepts
Know the parts of a liability policy
Understand the principles of risk, elements of insurability and
Know the parties to a contract
Know the characteristics of an insurance contract (legal terms must be memorized)
Understand legal interpretations affecting the insurance contract

1. The Concept of Insurance
Introduction
This section provides the foundation of insurance terms and legal concepts which the licensing
candidate must learn and understand. Some of the testing companies test on many of terms
contained in this section.

What is Insurance?
Insurance is a social device for spreading the chance of financial loss among a large number of
people. By purchasing insurance, a “person” shares risk with a group of others, thereby
reducing the individual potential for disastrous financial consequences. Transacting insurance
includes soliciting insurance, collecting premiums and handling claims.

Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 1

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
Insurance is based on the law of large numbers. By combining a large number of
homogeneous units, the insurer is able to make predictions of possible loss. Using the law of
large numbers, insurers are able to calculate their probable losses and to establish the rates for
premiums that will cover their losses and their operating expenses.

What is Underwriting?
Underwriting is the process of selecting certain types of risks that have historically produced a
profit and rejecting those risks that do not fit the underwriting criteria of the insurer. Good
underwriting of risk selection normally produces a favorable loss ratio. This means the
premium collected, less loss and expenses, produces a profit for the insurer.
Insurers must carefully underwrite all risks to avoid being the victim of adverse selection.
Adverse selection is selection against the insurance company. It is the tendency of insureds
with a greater-than-average chance of loss to purchase insurance.
In addition, insurers will sometimes use reinsurance as a means of reducing their exposure of
loss for a particular risk. Often an insurer will cede part of a risk to a reinsurer to avoid being
exposed to a larger than usual loss. Reinsurance is a contract of indemnity against liability by
which an insurance company procures another insurance company to insure it against loss or
liability by reason of the original insurance. Rather than an insurance company accepting the
entire risk, the risk is ceded to other companies or pools to spread the risk.

II. Property & Casualty Insurance Terms and Concepts
In this section we are going to use the term “property insurance” to describe insurance that
pays the insured for loss of property that is named in an insurance policy from a peril insured
against. Fire, wind, hail are examples of perils. We will use the term “liability insurance” to
describe insurance that pays a third party for a claim caused by the negligence of the insured.
An at-fault auto accident is an example. Keep in mind that a single policy can be written to
cover both property and liability. The Personal Auto Policy is one example of such a policy. It
covers damage to the vehicle (property) and liability coverage.
In this section concepts and topics will be covered that are very important. A grasp of these
concepts is necessary to give you, the student, a thorough understanding of the concepts
covered in the remainder of the text.

Parts of an Insurance Contract
All insurance policies may be divided into various sections. Endorsements are sometimes added
to the policy to amend coverages.
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 2

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
1. Declarations - The declarations section of a policy includes the identity and address of
the named insured, the policy term or period, the amount of insurance or limits of
liability, the policy premium, and any applicable deductibles. The declarations will also
include either a property description or a schedule of coverage parts, and a list of any
endorsements.
2. Insuring Agreement - The insuring agreement describes the covered perils, or risks
assumed, or nature of coverage, or makes some reference to the contractual agreement
between insurer and insured. In package policies each different coverage form includes
its own insuring agreement.
3. Conditions - Policy conditions set provisions, rules of conduct, duties, and obligations
for the parties. A number of common insurance conditions describe such things as the
policy period and territory, the insured's obligation to provide proof of loss, how
settlements are handled when other insurance is involved, and the right of each party to
cancel the policy. Depending on the kind of policy, conditions may be found in a
"Conditions" section or scattered throughout the policy forms.
4. Exclusions and Limitations - Exclusions may describe property, perils, hazards, or
losses arising from specific causes that are not covered by the policy. Exclusions may be
found in an "Exclusions" section of a policy or may be scattered throughout the policy.
In some cases, exclusions are built into the wording of insuring agreements and the
definitions of perils.
Some policies also include limitations that are less sweeping than true exclusions. A
limitation may eliminate or reduce coverage, but only under certain circumstances or
when specified conditions apply. For example, after a building has been vacant for 60
days, some types of commercial property losses will not be covered at all, while the
amount payable for other types of losses will be reduced by 15%.
5. Definitions - Definitions define important terms used in the policy language. Some
policies list definitions in a distinct section having that title. Some policies include
definitions in the “Conditions” section, while others spread definitions throughout
policy sections.
6. Endorsements - Some policies also contain endorsements that are used to add,
delete, or change any of the policy parts. Endorsements may alter the content of the
declarations and insuring agreement, and they may contain conditions, exclusions, and
definitions.

Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 3

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
Standardized Policies
Standardized policies refer to forms that have been filed by Insurance Services Office, Inc.
(ISO) to the individual insurance departments for approval. Many insurance companies use the
approved ISO forms rather than filing their own forms in each individual state.

Important Insurance Terms
1. Peril – A potential cause of loss. Accident, fire, and theft are common perils.
2. Hazard – Anything that increases the seriousness of a loss or increases the likelihood
that a loss will occur.
3. Direct Loss – A loss that is a direct consequence of a particular peril. Fire damage to
an apartment building is an example of a direct loss.
4. Indirect Loss – A loss that is a result of a covered peril but is not caused directly and
immediately by that peril. Loss of an apartment building by fire is a direct loss. The loss
of rental income as a result of the fire is an indirect loss.
5. Salvage – If the insurer pays a loss on behalf of the insured, the insurer is entitled to
the salvage to reduce the claim.
6. Abandonment – The insured cannot simply abandon the property to the insurance
company in exchange for the full-insured value.
7. Pair or Set Clause – This is a loss settlement condition that appears in many property
insurance contracts including inland marine. It states that if part of a pair or set is lost or
damaged, the loss will be valued as a fair proportion of the total value of the set, giving
consideration to the importance of the damaged article to the set. The insurer is not
required to pay for the value of the whole set. Example: A pair of earrings is worth and
insured for $5,000. One is lost or destroyed. The company will not pay $5,000 for the
set. They will pay a fair proportion of the pair's full value.
8. Deductible – This is the self-insured part of an insured loss. Usually applies to first
party claims such as property claims or auto physical damage claims. The insured must
bear this loss.
9. Vacancy and Unoccupancy – Vacancy means the building is void of contents and
people. The building is simply not being used. Perils such as freezing, vandalism and
malicious mischief are limited when a building is vacant. In most cases the insurance
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 4

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
can purchase Vacancy Permit coverage to have some of the coverage restored for an
additional premium. Unoccupancy means the premises are void of people. In most
cases this will not affect the coverage provided by the policy.
10. Assignment – An insurance policy cannot be assigned to another party without the
consent of the insurance company.
11. Liberalization – A clause in property/casualty insurance contracts which states that
if policy or endorsement forms are broadened and no additional premium is required,
then all existing similar policies or endorsements will be construed to include the
broadened coverage.
12. Binder – Insurance binders serve as temporary evidence that coverage is in effect
until the policy is issued. They usually are either oral or written. Some states such as
California require that they must be in writing. Other states such as Minnesota require
that an oral binder is legal but must be transferred to a written binder within three days.
Some states place restrictions on the length of time a binder can be in force. For
example: 30, 60 or 90 days.
13. Primary Insurance – In cases where more than one policy is in force, the primary
policy pays first.
14. Excess Insurance – An insurance policy that pays benefits only when coverage under
other applicable insurance policies have become exhausted.
15. Accident – A sudden and unforeseen event resulting in a financial loss.
16. Occurrence – A sudden and unforeseen event resulting in financial loss. May also be
a continuous or repeated exposure to an event that results in a financial loss.
17. Appraisal and Arbitration – Policies may contain one or both of these clauses to
facilitate an agreement when the insured and the insurer cannot agree on the value of
a claim.
a. Appraisal Clause – When the dispute involves a property claim, both parties
select an appraiser to determine the value of the loss. If the appraisers cannot
agree, then an umpire is selected to make the decision. The insured and insurer
each pay for their own appraiser and share the cost of the umpire.
b. Arbitration Clause – This clause usually appears in automobile policies to resolve
disputes for uninsured/underinsured motorist claims for bodily injury. It may also
be used to settle disputes between insurance companies involving third party
liability claims.
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 5

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
18. Subrogation Clause – This clause is used when the insurer has paid a covered claim
on behalf of the insured that is caused by another party. The insurance company is
entitled to the insured’s right of recovery from the negligent party. This clause is
sometimes called “transfer of right of recovery against others to us”.
19. Other Insurance Clause – If the insured has other sources of recovery for a
covered claim, this clause is activated. This is also called “Other sources of recovery on
insurance under two or more policies”. Some policies are primary and some are excess
depending on the wording in the insurance contract. The clause specifies the obligations
of the insurance carrier when other coverage is in force. Some claims are paid based on
a pro-rata approach. This means that each insurer will pay its percentage of the claim as
limit bears to the total amount of coverage in force. For example: If an insurer is
covering 20% of a property risk it will only pay 20% of a loss.
20. Certificates of Insurance – It is not uncommon for an insured to be required to
provide a certificate of insurance as evidence that coverage is in effect. Many states
require evidence of automobile insurance be carried at all times. A certificate contains a
general summary of the coverage. Contractors are often required to provide evidence
of their auto, general liability and Workers’ Compensation coverage to comply with the
terms of a contract in the form of a certificate of insurance.
21. Transacting Insurance – The definition of this term may vary in individual states.
In most states it means that any person who has contact with an insured involving
insurance matters should be licensed. Personnel that quote, sell, service, offer advice,
explain coverage or adjust claims would normally be required to be licensed.
Attorneys, appraisers and clerical personnel usually are not required to be licensed.
22. Indemnity – The principle of indemnity assumes that a claimant should only be
restored to the approximate financial condition that existed prior to the loss, no
better or no worse. If a claimant makes a profit from their loss, the principle of
indemnity is violated. This principle applies to both first party property losses and
third party liability claims.
23. Proximate Cause of Loss - An unbroken chain of events that causes a loss. An event
that, in a natural and continuous sequence, produces a loss. If a fire should occur,
followed by smoke and water damage, the entire loss is considered to have been caused
by the peril of fire.
24. Proof of Loss – This is a form completed by the claimant listing the property that has
been either lost or damaged due to a covered loss.
25. Ambiguity – Ambiguity (language that is vague and creates doubt) in the policy
provisions will usually be resolved by the courts in favor of the insured.
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 6

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
26. Contribution By Equal Shares – Type of “Other Insurance” condition found in
liability policies. It calls for all insurers to contribute equally up to the limit of the
policy having the smallest limit, whereupon that company stops paying. The other
companies share in the remainder of the loss until the loss is paid in full or until all
policy limits are exhausted.
27. Nonconcurrency – Situation that exists when the same property is covered by
more than one policy, but the policies are not identical as to the extent of
coverage provided.

Important Property Insurance Concepts
1. Cause of Loss forms – State the perils that are to be insured against.
2. Named Peril vs. Open Peril – A named peril form lists the specific perils to be
covered in the policy. The open peril form does not list the perils but provides broader
coverage. This means that all perils are covered except the perils listed in the Exclusions
section of the policy.
3. Basic Types of Construction – Refers frame, masonry, metal, brick veneer, fire
resistive, etc. The better the construction the lower the fire rate.
4. Loss Evaluation Methods
These methods are used determine the value of the loss:
a. Actual cash value: The cost of replacement minus depreciation.
b. Replacement cost: The current cost to purchase new, the item that was lost,
without depreciation.
c. Functional replacement cost: As reasonably close to the replacement of the
lost or damaged item as possible.
d. Market value: Usually antiques claims are adjusted on the basis of market value
– the price that the market will support.
e. Agreed value: The value to be insured is agreed to by the insured and the
insurer. This method is used when the true value cannot accurately be
determined.
f.

Stated amount: An agreed amount of insurance which is shown on the policy
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 7

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
and that will be paid in the event of a total loss regardless of the actual value of
the property.
g. Valued policy: A policy that states that in the event of a total loss, a specific
amount will be paid, and that is set as the limit of the policy. It is generally used
to insure fine arts, jewelry and furs. This term also applies in some states that
have a valued policy law. In case of a total loss the company cannot dispute the
amount to be paid under most circumstances except for the normal exceptions
such as fraud, etc.
5. Definition of an insured:
a. Those that have an insurable interest in the property who would suffer a financial
loss if the property were damaged by an insured peril.
b. In personal insurance this can include family members without listing their names
on the declarations page of the policy.
c. Additional insureds such as a lien holder.
6. Basis for Insuring Property:
a. Specific Basis – A separate limit per insured item applies. Example: A separate
limit on the building and/or one for the contents.
b. Blanket Basis – One limit that applies to both building and contents. With
blanket insurance, usually more than one location is insured under a single limit.
Blanket insurance is more often written on contents coverage with one blanket
limit applying to more than one building or location. This assists the insured in
avoiding underinsurance at a particular location in case of loss.
c. Reporting Form – This allows the insured to report values to the company
(usually on a monthly basis) of the insured contents. This allows the insured to
pay for coverage on what is actually reported to the company. This form
requires a 100% coinsurance clause.
7. Coinsurance Clause - With commercial insurance the coinsurance clause is a method
of requiring the insured to insure at least 80% of the value of the property in exchange
for a premium discount. If the insured's policy contains this clause and the insured
carries less that this amount, a penalty will occur in case of partial losses. The insured
can always insure for more than 80% of the value of the property. As an example, if a
person insures property with an actual cash value of $100,000 on a policy with an 80
percent coinsurance requirement, the insurance required is $80,000 (80 percent of
$100,000). If the insured elects to carry a limit of only $60,000 (60 percent of the
Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 8

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
actual cash value), then he or she becomes a partner with the insurance company on
partial losses.
8. Third party provisions found in property insurance policies:
a. Standard mortgage clause: Protects the interest of the financial institution
against loss to real property caused by perils insured against. It also grants
coverage even if the insured intentionally caused the loss. The institution can
also provide a proof of loss or pay premiums in case the insured cannot or
refuses to do so. They must also be advised if the contract has been cancelled or
non-renewed by the insurer.
b. Loss payable clause: Similar to the mortgagee clause but applies to chattel
property.
c. No benefit to bailee: An insured's property insurance policy protects the
insured and not a bailee of the insured's property. If the insured's property were
destroyed by fire while at the dry cleaners, the insurance company would only
protect the insured. If the dry cleaners are negligent the insurance company
could pay the insured and subrogate against the dry cleaners.

Important Liability Insurance Concepts
1. Liability Losses - A liability loss occurs when a person or entity is determined to have
been responsible, or legally liable, for injury or loss to another person or liable for
damage to another's property and the law requires them to make financial restitution.
These are called third party losses. Liability losses are paid by casualty insurance type
policies. These include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Personal auto policies
Commercial auto policies
General liability policies
Professional liability policies
Umbrella policies
Personal liability (including boats and yachts)

2. Constructive Total Loss – Occurs when the damage to repair exceeds the value of
the vehicle after repairs have been made. The vehicle is considered to be a
“constructive total loss”. Constructive total loss applies to other types of property
losses as well.

Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles - 9

______________________________________________________________________________
Copyright © Insurance Schools, Inc.
Copying any part of this text is strictly prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.

Property & Casualty Licensing Manual
Insurance Concepts & Principles

__________________________________________________________________
3. Negligence - For a liability policy to respond the insured must be guilty of “negligence”
and coverage must be granted by the policy. Intentional acts are never covered by
liability policies. Negligence is defined as the lack of reasonable care that is required to
protect others and/or their property from the unreasonable chance of harm. This could
also be a failure to act or not to act as a reasonable person under the same set of
circumstances. Note: Gross negligence is defined as willful and wanton negligence or
misconduct without the slightest degree of care.
4. Tort - A tort is a civil wrong that violates the rights of others. A person becomes legally
liable by committing a tort. Generally (but not always), a court of law must determine
negligence. There are usually four factors involved to establish negligence.
•
•
•
•
5.

Legal duty is owed.
Breach of legal duty owed.
Proximate cause
Damages

Punitive Damages – Casualty policies cover bodily injury and property damage caused
by the insured as a result of his/her negligence. Punitive damages (sometimes referred to
as “exemplary damages”) are often awarded by the court and intended to punish the
defendant. An example would be “gross misconduct” and the court wants to make an
example of the defendant to discourage others from behaving in a like manner. In some
states, the insurance company is prevented from paying punitive damages because
payment by the insurance company would fail to penalize the defendant and defeats the
purpose of the penalty imposed by the court.

6. Defenses Against Negligence:
a. Contributory Negligence – Common law defense against negligence that states
that if an individual contributes to his or her own loss in any way, then another
cannot be held liable for the loss.
b. Comparative Negligence – Law that allows an injured party to collect from
another party for a loss, even when the injured party contributed to his or her
own loss. Damages are reduced to the extent of the injured party's negligence.
This is the defense used in most states.
c. Assumption of Risk – In some states, a doctrine known as assumption of risk
may apply. Assumption of risk applies when a person knowingly exposes himself
or herself to danger or injury. When a person assumes this risk, he or she may
be prevented from recovering from a negligent party. This doctrine is frequently
associated with injuries incurred by spectators at sporting events.

Chapter 1 - Insurance Concepts & Principles 

 
Acceleration Clause - The part of a contract that says when a loan may be declared due and payable.

Accidental Death Benefit - In a life insurance policy, benefit in addition to the death benefit paid to the beneficiary, should death occur due to an accident. There can be certain exclusions as well as time and age limits.

Active Participant - Person whose absence from a planned event would trigger a benefit if the event needs to be canceled or postponed.

Activities of Daily Living - Bathing, preparing and eating meals, moving from room to room, getting into and out of beds or chairs, dressing, using a toilet.

Actual Cash Value - Cost of replacing damaged or destroyed property with comparable new property, minus depreciation and obsolescence. For example, a 10-year-old sofa will not be replaced at current full value because of a decade of depreciation. 

Actuary - A specialist in the mathematics of insurance who calculates rates, reserves, dividends and other statistics. (Americanism: In most other countries the individual is known as "mathematician.")

Adjustable Rate - An interest rate that changes, based on changes in a published market-rate index.

Adjuster - A representative of the insurer who seeks to determine the extent of the insurer's liability for loss when a claim is submitted.

Admitted Assets - Assets permitted by state law to be included in an insurance company's annual statement. These assets are an important factor when regulators measure insurance company solvency. They include mortgages, stocks, bonds and real estate.

Agent -individual who sells and services insurance policies in either of two classifications:

Independent agent represents at least two insurance companies and (at least in theory) services clients by searching the market for the most advantageous price for the most coverage. The agent's commission is a percentage of each premium paid and includes a fee for servicing the insured's policy.
Direct or career agent represents only one company and sells only its policies. This agent is paid on a commission basis in much the same manner as the independent agent.
Aggregate Limit - Usually refers to liability insurance and indicates the amount of coverage that the insured has under the contract for a specific period of time, usually the contract period, no matter how many separate accidents might occur.

Annual Administrative Fee - Charge for expenses associated with administering a group employee benefit plan.

Annual Crediting Cap - The maximum rate that the equity-indexed annuity can be credited in a year. If a contract has an upper limit, or cap, of 7 percent and the index linked to the annuity gained 7.2 percent, only 7 percent would be credited to the annuity.

Annuitization - Process by which you convert part or all of the money in a qualified retirement plan or nonqualified annuity contract into a stream of regular income payments, either for your lifetime or the lifetimes of you and your joint annuitant. Once you choose to annuitize, the payment schedule and the amount is generally fixed and can't be altered.

Annuitization Options - Choices in the way to annuitize. For example, life with a 10-year period certain means payouts will last a lifetime, but should the annuitant die during the first 10 years, the payments will continue to beneficiaries through the 10th year. Selection of such an option reduces the amount of the periodic payment.

Annuity - An agreement by an insurer to make periodic payments that continue during the survival of the annuitant(s) or for a specified period.

Approved for Reinsurance - Indicates the company is approved (or authorized) to write reinsurance on risks in this state. A license to write reinsurance might not be required in these states.

Approved or Not Disapproved for Surplus Lines - Indicates the company is approved (or not disapproved) to write excess or surplus lines in this state.

Assets - Assets refer to "all the available properties of every kind or possession of an insurance company that might be used to pay its debts." There are three classifications of assets: invested assets, all other assets, and total admitted assets. Invested assets refer to things such as bonds, stocks, cash and income-producing real estate. All other assets refer to nonincome producing possessions such as the building the company occupies, office furniture, and debts owed, usually in the form of deferred and unpaid premiums. Total admitted assets refer to everything a company owns. All other plus invested assets equals total admitted assets. By law, some states don't permit insurance companies to claim certain goods and possessions, such as deferred and unpaid premiums, in the all other assets category, declaring them "nonadmissable."

Attained Age - Insured's age at a particular time. For example, many term life insurance policies allow an insured to convert to permanent insurance without a physical examination at the insured's then attained age. Upon conversion, the premium usually rises substantially to reflect the insured's age and diminished life expectancy.

Authorized Under Federal Products Liability Risk Retention Act (Risk Retention Groups) - Indicates companies operating under the Federal Products Liability Risk Retention Act of 1981 and the Liability Risk Retention Act of 1986.

Automobile Liability Insurance - Coverage if an insured is legally liable for bodily injury or property damage caused by an automobile.

»back to top
Balance Sheet - An accounting term referring to a listing of a company's assets, liabilities and surplus as of a specific date.

Benefit Period - In health insurance, the number of days for which benefits are paid to the named insured and his or her dependents. For example, the number of days that benefits are calculated for a calendar year consist of the days beginning on Jan. 1 and ending on Dec. 31 of each year.

Best's Capital Adequacy Relativity (BCAR) - This percentage measures a company's relative capital strength compared to its industry peer composite. A company's BCAR, which is an important component in determining the appropriateness of its rating, is calculated by dividing a company's capital adequacy ratio by the capital adequacy ratio of the median of its industry peer composite using Best's proprietary capital mode. Capital adequacy ratios are calculated as the net required capital necessary to support components of underwriting, asset, and credit risks in relation to economic surplus.

Broker - Insurance salesperson that searches the marketplace in the interest of clients, not insurance companies.

Broker-Agent - Independent insurance salesperson who represents particular insurers but also might function as a broker by searching the entire insurance market to place an applicant's coverage to maximize protection and minimize cost. This person is licensed as an agent and a broker.

Business Net Retention - This item represents the percentage of a company's gross writings that are retained for its own account. Gross writings are the sum of direct writings and assumed writings. This measure excludes affiliated writings.

»back to top
Capital - Equity of shareholders of a stock insurance company. The company's capital and surplus are measured by the difference between its assets minus its liabilities. This value protects the interests of the company's policyowners in the event it develops financial problems; the policyowners' benefits are thus protected by the insurance company's capital. Shareholders' interest is second to that of policyowners.

Capitalization or Leverage - Measures the exposure of a company's surplus to various operating and financial practices. A highly leveraged, or poorly capitalized, company can show a high return on surplus, but might be exposed to a high risk of instability.

Captive Agent - Representative of a single insurer or fleet of insurers who is obliged to submit business only to that company, or at the very minimum, give that company first refusal rights on a sale. In exchange, that insurer usually provides its captive agents with an allowance for office expenses as well as an extensive list of employee benefits such as pensions, life insurance, health insurance, and credit unions.

Case Management - A system of coordinating medical services to treat a patient, improve care and reduce cost. A case manager coordinates health care delivery for patients.

Casualty - Liability or loss resulting from an accident.

Casualty Insurance - That type of insurance that is primarily concerned with losses caused by injuries to persons and legal liability imposed upon the insured for such injury or for damage to property of others. It also includes such diverse forms as plate glass, insurance against crime, such as robbery, burglary and forgery, boiler and machinery insurance and Aviation insurance. Many casualty companies also write surety business.

Ceded Reinsurance Leverage - The ratio of the reinsurance premiums ceded, plus net ceded reinsurance balances from non-US affiliates for paid losses, unpaid losses, incurred but not reported (IBNR), unearned premiums and commissions, less funds held from reinsurers, plus ceded reinsurance balances payable, to policyholders' surplus. This ratio measures the company's dependence upon the security provided by its reinsurers and its potential exposure to adjustment on such reinsurance.

Change in Net Premiums Written (IRIS) - The annual percentage change in Net Premiums Written. A company should demonstrate its ability to support controlled business growth with quality surplus growth from strong internal capital generation.

Change in Policyholder Surplus (IRIS) - The percentage change in policyholder surplus from the prior year-end derived from operating earnings, investment gains, net contributed capital and other miscellaneous sources. This ratio measures a company's ability to increase policyholders' security.

Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriter (CPCU) -Professional designation earned after the successful completion of 10 national examinations given by the American Institute for Property and Liability Underwriters. Covers such areas of expertise as insurance, risk management, economics, finance, management, accounting, and law. Three years of work experience also are required in the insurance business or a related area.

Claim - A demand made by the insured, or the insured's beneficiary, for payment of the benefits as provided by the policy.

Class 3-6 Bonds (% of PHS) - This test measures exposure to noninvestment grade bonds as a percentage of surplus. Generally, noninvestment grade bonds carry higher default and illiquidity risks. The designation of quality classifications that coincide with different bond ratings assigned by major credit rating agencies.

Coinsurance - In property insurance, requires the policyholder to carry insurance equal to a specified percentage of the value of property to receive full payment on a loss. For health insurance, it is a percentage of each claim above the deductible paid by the policyholder. For a 20% health insurance coinsurance clause, the policyholder pays for the deductible plus 20% of his covered losses. After paying 80% of losses up to a specified ceiling, the insurer starts paying 100% of losses.

Collision Insurance - Covers physical damage to the insured's automobile (other than that covered under comprehensive insurance) resulting from contact with another inanimate object.

Combined Ratio After Policyholder Dividends - The sum of the loss, expense and policyholder dividend ratios not reflecting investment income or income taxes. This ratio measures the company's overall underwriting profitability, and a combined ratio of less than 100 indicates an underwriting profit.

Commercial Lines - Refers to insurance for businesses, professionals and commercial establishments.

Commission - Fee paid to an agent or insurance salesperson as a percentage of the policy premium. The percentage varies widely depending on coverage, the insurer and the marketing methods.

Common Carrier - A business or agency that is available to the public for transportation of persons, goods or messages. Common carriers include trucking companies, bus lines and airlines.

Comprehensive Insurance - Auto insurance coverage providing protection in the event of physical damage (other than collision) or theft of the insured car. For example, fire damage or a cracked windshield would be covered under the comprehensive section.

Concurrent Periods - In hospital income protection, when a patient is confined to a hospital due to more than one injury and/or illness at the same time, benefits are paid as if the total disability resulted from only one cause.

Conditional Reserves - This item represents the aggregate of various reserves which, for technical reasons, are treated by companies as liabilities. Such reserves, which are similar to free resources or surplus, include unauthorized reinsurance, excess of statutory loss reserves over statement reserves, dividends to policyholders undeclared and other similar reserves established voluntarily or in compliance with statutory regulations.

Coverage - The scope of protection provided under an insurance policy. In property insurance, coverage lists perils insured against, properties covered, locations covered, individuals insured, and the limits of indemnification. In life insurance, living and death benefits are listed.

Convertible - Term life insurance coverage that can be converted into permanent insurance regardless of an insured's physical condition and without a medical examination. The individual cannot be denied coverage or charged an additional premium for any health problems.

Copayment - A predetermined, flat fee an individual pays for health-care services, in addition to what insurance covers. For example, some HMOs require a $10 copayment for each office visit, regardless of the type or level of services provided during the visit. Copayments are not usually specified by percentages.

Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA) - Automatic adjustment applied to Social Security retirement payments when the consumer price index increases at a rate of at least 3%, the first quarter of one year to the first quarter of the next year.

Coverage Area - The geographic region covered by travel insurance.

Creditable Coverage - Term means that benefits provided by other drug plans are at least as good as those provided by the new Medicare Part D program. This may be important to people eligible for Medicare Part D but who do not sign up at their first opportunity because if the other plans provide creditable coverage, plan members can later convert to Medicare Part D without paying higher premiums than those in effect during their open enrollment period. 

Current Liquidity (IRIS) - The sum of cash, unaffiliated invested assets and encumbrances on other properties to net liabilities plus ceded reinsurance balances payable, expressed as a percent. This ratio measures the proportion of liabilities covered by unencumbered cash and unaffiliated investments. If this ratio is less than 100, the company's solvency is dependent on the collectibility or marketability of premium balances and investments in affiliates. This ratio assumes the collectibility of all amounts recoverable from reinsurers on paid and unpaid losses and unearned premiums.

»back to top
Death Benefit - The limit of insurance or the amount of benefit that will be paid in the event of the death of a covered person.

Deductible - Amount of loss that the insured pays before the insurance kicks in.

Developed to Net Premiums Earned - The ratio of developed premiums through the year to net premiums earned. If premium growth was relatively steady, and the mix of business by line didn't materially change, this ratio measures whether or not a company's loss reserves are keeping pace with premium growth.

Development to Policyholder Surplus (IRIS) - The ratio measures reserve deficiency or redundancy in relation to policyholder surplus. This ratio reflects the degree to which year-end surplus was either overstated (+) or understated (-) in each of the past several years, if original reserves had been restated to reflect subsequent development through year end.

Direct Premiums Written - The aggregate amount of recorded originated premiums, other than reinsurance, written during the year, whether collected or not, at the close of the year, plus retrospective audit premium collections, after deducting all return premiums.

Direct Writer - An insurer whose distribution mechanism is either the direct selling system or the exclusive agency system.

Disease Management - A system of coordinated health-care interventions and communications for patients with certain illnesses.

Dividend - The return of part of the policy's premium for a policy issued on a participating basis by either a mutual or stock insurer. A portion of the surplus paid to the stockholders of a corporation.

»back to top
Earned Premium - The amount of the premium that has been paid for in advance that has been "earned" by virtue of the fact that time has passed without claim. A three-year policy that has been paid in advance and is one year old would have only partly earned the premium.

Elimination Period - The time which must pass after filing a claim before policyholder can collect insurance benefits. Also known as "waiting period."

Employers Liability Insurance - Coverage against common law liability of an employer for accidents to employees, as distinguished from liability imposed by a workers' compensation law.

Encumbrance - A claim on property, such as a mortgage, a lien for work and materials, or a right of dower. The interest of the property owner is reduced by the amount of the encumbrance.

Exclusions - Items or conditions that are not covered by the general insurance contract.

Expense Ratio - The ratio of underwriting expenses (including commissions) to net premiums written. This ratio measures the company's operational efficiency in underwriting its book of business.

Exposure - Measure of vulnerability to loss, usually expressed in dollars or units.

Extended Replacement Cost - This option extends replacement cost loss settlement to personal property and to outdoor antennas, carpeting, domestic appliances, cloth awnings, and outdoor equipment, subject to limitations on certain kinds of personal property; includes inflation protection coverage. 

»back to top
File-and-Use Rating Laws - State-based laws which permit insurers to adopt new rates without the prior approval of the insurance department. Usually insurers submit their new rates with supporting statistical data.

Financing Entity - Provides money for purchases.

Floater - A separate policy available to cover the value of goods beyond the coverage of a standard renters insurance policy including movable property such as jewelry or sports equipment.

Future Purchase Option - Life and health insurance provisions that guarantee the insured the right to buy additional coverage without proving insurability. Also known as "guaranteed insurability option."

»back to top
General Account - All premiums are paid into an insurer's general account. Thus, buyers are subject to credit-risk exposure to the insurance company, which is low but not zero.

General Liability Insurance -Insurance designed to protect business owners and operators from a wide variety of liability exposures. Exposures could include liability arising from accidents resulting from the insured's premises or operations, products sold by the insured, operations completed by the insured, and contractual liability.

Grace Period - The length of time (usually 31 days) after a premium is due and unpaid during which the policy, including all riders, remains in force. If a premium is paid during the grace period, the premium is considered to have been paid on time. In Universal Life policies, it typically provides for coverage to remain in force for 60 days following the date cash value becomes insufficient to support the payment of monthly insurance costs.

Gross Leverage - The sum of net leverage and ceded reinsurance leverage. This ratio measures a company's gross exposure to pricing errors in its current book of business, to errors of estimating its liabilities, and exposure to its reinsurers.

Guaranteed Insurability Option - See "future purchase option."

Guaranteed Issue Right - The right to purchase insurance without physical examination; the present and past physical condition of the applicant are not considered.

Guaranteed Renewable - A policy provision in many products which guarantees the policyowner the right to renew coverage at every policy anniversary date. The company does not have the right to cancel coverage except for nonpayment of premiums by the policyowner; however, the company can raise rates if they choose.

Guaranty Association - An organization of life insurance companies within a state responsible for covering the financial obligations of a member company that becomes insolvent.

»back to top
Hazard - A circumstance that increases the likelihood or probable severity of a loss. For example, the storing of explosives in a home basement is a hazard that increases the probability of an explosion.

Hazardous Activity - Bungee jumping, scuba diving, horse riding and other activities not generally covered by standard insurance policies. For insurers that do provide cover for such activities, it is unlikely they will cover liability and personal accident, which should be provided by the company hosting the activity.

Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) - Prepaid group health insurance plan that entitles members to services of participating physicians, hospitals and clinics. Emphasis is on preventative medicine, and members must use contracted health-care providers.

Health Reimbursement Arrangement - Owners of high-deductible health plans who are not qualified for a health savings account can use an HRA.

Health Savings Account - Plan that allows you to contribute pre-tax money to be used for qualified medical expenses. HSAs, which are portable, must be linked to a high-deductible health insurance policy.

Hurricane Deductible - Amount you must pay out-of-pocket before hurricane insurance will kick in. Many insurers in hurricane-prone states are selling homeowners insurance policies with percentage deductibles for storm damage, instead of the traditional dollar deductibles used for claims such as fire and theft. Percentage deductibles vary from one percent of a home's insured value to 15 percent, depending on many factors that differ by state and insurer.

»back to top
Impaired Insurer - An insurer which is in financial difficulty to the point where its ability to meet financial obligations or regulatory requirements is in question.

Indemnity - Restoration to the victim of a loss by payment, repair or replacement.

Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of America (IIABA) - Formerly the Independent Insurance Agents of America (IIAA), this is a member organization of independent agents and brokers monitoring and affecting industry issues. Numerous state associations are affiliated with the IIABA.

Income Taxes - Incurred income taxes (including income taxes on capital gains) reported in each annual statement for that year.

Inflation Protection - An optional property coverage endorsement offered by some insurers that increases the policy's limits of insurance during the policy term to keep pace with inflation.

Insurable Interest - Interest in property such that loss or destruction of the property could cause a financial loss.

Insurance Adjuster - A representative of the insurer who seeks to determine the extent of the insurer's liability for loss when a claim is submitted. Independent insurance adjusters are hired by insurance companies on an "as needed" basis and might work for several insurance companies at the same time. Independent adjusters charge insurance companies both by the hour and by miles traveled. Public adjusters work for the insured in the settlement of claims and receive a percentage of the claim as their fee. A.M. Best's Directory of Recommended Insurance Attorneys and Adjusters lists independent adjusters only.

Insurance Attorneys - An attorney who practices the law as it relates to insurance matters. Attorneys might be solo practitioners or work as part of a law firm. Insurance companies who retain attorneys to defend them against law suits might hire staff attorneys to work for them in-house or they might retain attorneys on an as-needed basis. A.M. Best's Directory of Recommended Attorneys and Adjusters lists insurance defense attorneys who concentrate their practice in insurance defense such as coverage issues, bad faith, malpractice, products liability, and workers' compensation.

The Institutes - An organization which develops programs and conducts national examinations in general insurance, risk management, management, adjusting, underwriting, auditing and loss control management.

Interest-Crediting Methods - There are at least 35 interest-crediting methods that insurers use. They usually involve some combination of point-to-point, annual reset, yield spread, averaging, or high water mark.

Investment Income - The return received by insurers from their investment portfolios including interest, dividends and realized capital gains on stocks. It doesn't include the value of any stocks or bonds that the company currently owns.

Investments in Affiliates - Bonds, stocks, collateral loans, short-term investments in affiliated and real estate properties occupied by the company.

Insurance Regulatory Information System (IRIS) - Introduced by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners in 1974 to identify insurance companies that might require further regulatory review.

»back to top
Laddering - Purchasing bond investments that mature at different time intervals.

Lapse Ratio - The ratio of the number of life insurance policies that lapsed within a given period to the number in force at the beginning of that period.

Least Expensive Alternative Treatment - The amount an insurance company will pay based on its determination of cost for a particular procedure.

Leverage or Capitalization - Measures the exposure of a company's surplus to various operating and financial practices. A highly leveraged, or poorly capitalized, company can show a high return on surplus, but might be exposed to a high risk of instability.

Liability - Broadly, any legally enforceable obligation. The term is most commonly used in a pecuniary sense.

Liability Insurance - Insurance that pays and renders service on behalf of an insured for loss arising out of his responsibility, due to negligence, to others imposed by law or assumed by contract.

Licensed - Indicates the company is incorporated (or chartered) in another state but is a licensed (admitted) insurer for this state to write specific lines of business for which it qualifies.

Licensed for Reinsurance Only - Indicates the company is a licensed (admitted) insurer to write reinsurance on risks in this state.

Lifetime Reserve Days - Sixty additional days Medicare pays for when you are hospitalized for more than 90 days in a benefit period. These days can only be used once during your lifetime. For each lifetime reserve day, Medicare pays all covered costs except for a daily coinsurance amount.

Liquidity - Liquidity is the ability of an individual or business to quickly convert assets into cash without incurring a considerable loss. There are two kinds of liquidity: quick and current. Quick liquidity refers to funds--cash, short-term investments, and government bonds--and possessions which can immediately be converted into cash in the case of an emergency. Current liquidity refers to current liquidity plus possessions such as real estate which cannot be immediately liquidated, but eventually can be sold and converted into cash. Quick liquidity is a subset of current liquidity. This reflects the financial stability of a company and thus their rating.

Living Benefits - This feature allows you, under certain circumstances, to receive the proceeds of your life insurance policy before you die. Such circumstances include terminal or catastrophic illness, the need for long-term care, or confinement to a nursing home. Also known as "accelerated death benefits."

Lloyd's - Generally refers to Lloyd's of London, England, an institution within which individual underwriters accept or reject the risks offered to them. The Lloyd's Corp. provides the support facility for their activities.

Lloyds Organizations - These organizations are voluntary unincorporated associations of individuals. Each individual assumes a specified portion of the liability under each policy issued. The underwriters operate through a common attorney-in-fact appointed for this purpose by the underwriters. The laws of most states contain some provisions governing the formation and operation of such organizations, but these laws don't generally provide as strict a supervision and control as the laws dealing with incorporated stock and mutual insurance companies.

Loss Adjustment Expenses - Expenses incurred to investigate and settle losses.

Loss and Loss-Adjustment Reserves to Policyholder Surplus Ratio - The higher the multiple of loss reserves to surplus, the more a company's solvency is dependent upon having and maintaining reserve adequacy.

Losses and Loss-Adjustment Expenses - This represents the total reserves for unpaid losses and loss-adjustment expenses, including reserves for any incurred but not reported losses, and supplemental reserves established by the company. It is the total for all lines of business and all accident years.

Loss Control - All methods taken to reduce the frequency and/or severity of losses including exposure avoidance, loss prevention, loss reduction, segregation of exposure units and noninsurance transfer of risk. A combination of risk control techniques with risk financing techniques forms the nucleus of a risk management program. The use of appropriate insurance, avoidance of risk, loss control, risk retention, self insuring, and other techniques that minimize the risks of a business, individual, or organization.

Loss Ratio - The ratio of incurred losses and loss-adjustment expenses to net premiums earned. This ratio measures the company's underlying profitability, or loss experience, on its total book of business.

Loss Reserve - The estimated liability, as it would appear in an insurer's financial statement, for unpaid insurance claims or losses that have occurred as of a given evaluation date. Usually includes losses incurred but not reported (IBNR), losses due but not yet paid, and amounts not yet due. For individual claims, the loss reserve is the estimate of what will ultimately be paid out on that claim.

Losses Incurred (Pure Losses) - Net paid losses during the current year plus the change in loss reserves since the prior year end.

»back to top
Medical Loss Ratio - Total health benefits divided by total premium.

Member Month - Total number of health plan participants who are members for each month.

Mortality and Expense Risk Fees - A charge that covers such annuity contract guarantees as death benefits.

Mortgage Insurance Policy - In life and health insurance, a policy covering a mortgagor with benefits intended to pay off the balance due on a mortgage upon the insured's death, or to meet the payments due on a mortgage in case of the insured's death or disability.

Mutual Insurance Companies - Companies with no capital stock, and owned by policyholders. The earnings of the company--over and above the payments of the losses, operating expenses and reserves--are the property of the policyholders. There are two types of mutual insurance companies. A nonassessable mutual charges a fixed premium and the policyholders cannot be assessed further. Legal reserves and surplus are maintained to provide payment of all claims. Assessable mutuals are companies that charge an initial fixed premium and, if that isn't sufficient, might assess policyholders to meet losses in excess of the premiums that have been charged.

»back to top
Named Perils - Perils specifically covered on insured property.

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) - Association of state insurance commissioners whose purpose is to promote uniformity of insurance regulation, monitor insurance solvency and develop model laws for passage by state legislatures.

Net Income - The total after-tax earnings generated from operations and realized capital gains as reported in the company's NAIC annual statement on page 4, line 16.

Net Investment Income - This item represents investment income earned during the year less investment expenses and depreciation on real estate. Investment expenses are the expenses related to generating investment income and capital gains but exclude income taxes.

Net Leverage - The sum of a company's net premium written to policyholder surplus and net liabilities to policyholder surplus. This ratio measures the combination of a company's net exposure to pricing errors in its current book of business and errors of estimation in its net liabilities after reinsurance, in relation to policyholder surplus.

Net Liabilities to Policyholder Surplus - Net liabilities expressed as a ratio to policyholder surplus. Net liabilities equal total liabilities less conditional reserves, plus encumbrances on real estate, less the smaller of receivables from or payable to affiliates. This ratio measures company's exposures to errors of estimation in its loss reserves and all other liabilities. Loss-reserve leverage is generally the key component of net liability leverage. The higher the loss-reserve leverage the more critical a company's solvency depends upon maintaining reserve adequacy.

Net Premium - The amount of premium minus the agent's commission. Also, the premium necessary to cover only anticipated losses, before loading to cover other expenses.

Net Premiums Earned - The adjustment of net premiums written for the increase or decrease of the company's liability for unearned premiums during the year. When an insurance company's business increases from year to year, the earned premiums will usually be less than the written premiums. With the increased volume, the premiums are considered fully paid at the inception of the policy so that, at the end of a calendar period, the company must set up premiums representing the unexpired terms of the policies. On a decreasing volume, the reverse is true.

Net Premiums Written - Represents gross premium written, direct and reinsurance assumed, less reinsurance ceded.

Net Underwriting Income - Net premiums earned less incurred losses, loss-adjustment expenses, underwriting expenses incurred, and dividends to policyholders.

Nonstandard Auto (High Risk Auto or Substandard Auto) - Insurance for motorists who have poor driving records or have been canceled or refused insurance. The premium is much higher than standard auto due to the additional risks.

Net Premiums Written to Policyholder Surplus (IRIS) - This ratio measures a company's net retained premiums written after reinsurance assumed and ceded, in relation to its surplus. This ratio measures the company's exposure to pricing errors in its current book of business.

Non-Recourse Mortgage - A home loan in which the borrower can never owe more than the home's value at the time the loan is repaid.

Noncancellable - Contract terms, including costs that can never be changed.

»back to top
Occurrence - An event that results in an insured loss. In some lines of business, such as liability, an occurrence is distinguished from accident in that the loss doesn't have to be sudden and fortuitous and can result from continuous or repeated exposure which results in bodily injury or property damage neither expected not intended by the insured.

Operating Cash Flow - Measures the funds generated from insurance operations, which includes the change in cash and invested assets attributed to underwriting activities, net investment income and federal income taxes. This measure excludes stockholder dividends, capital contributions, unrealized capital gains/losses and various noninsurance related transactions with affiliates. This test measures a company's ability to meet current obligations through the internal generation of funds from insurance operations. Negative balances might indicate unprofitable underwriting results or low yielding assets.

Operating Ratio (IRIS) - Combined ratio less the net investment income ratio (net investment income to net premiums earned). The operating ratio measures a company's overall operational profitability from underwriting and investment activities. This ratio doesn't reflect other operating income/expenses, capital gains or income taxes. An operating ratio of more than 100 indicates a company is unable to generate profits from its underwriting and investment activities.

Other Income/Expenses - This item represents miscellaneous sources of operating income or expenses that principally relate to premium finance income or charges for uncollectible premium and reinsurance business.

Out-of-Pocket Limit - A predetermined amount of money that an individual must pay before insurance will pay 100% for an individual's health-care expenses.

Overall Liquidity Ratio - Total admitted assets divided by total liabilities less conditional reserves. This ratio indicates a company's ability to cover net liabilities with total assets. This ratio doesn't address the quality and marketability of premium balances, affiliated investments and other uninvested assets.

Own Occupation - Insurance contract provision that allows policyholders to collect benefits if they can no longer work in their own occupation.

»back to top
Paid-Up Additional Insurance - An option that allows the policyholder to use policy dividends and/or additional premiums to buy additional insurance on the same plan as the basic policy and at a face amount determined by the insured's attained age.

Participation Rate - In equity-indexed annuities, a participation rate determines how much of the gain in the index will be credited to the annuity. For example, the insurance company may set the participation rate at 80%, which means the annuity would only be credited with 80% of the gain experienced by the index.

Peril - The cause of a possible loss.

Personal Injury Protection - Pays basic expenses for an insured and his or her family in states with no-fault auto insurance. No-fault laws generally require drivers to carry both liability insurance and personal injury protection coverage to pay for basic needs of the insured, such as medical expenses, in the event of an accident.

Personal Lines - Insurance for individuals and families, such as private-passenger auto and homeowners insurance.

Point-of-Service Plan - Health insurance policy that allows the employee to choose between in-network and out-of-network care each time medical treatment is needed.

Policy - The written contract effecting insurance, or the certificate thereof, by whatever name called, and including all clause, riders, endorsements, and papers attached thereto and made a part thereof.

Policyholder Dividend Ratio - The ratio of dividends to policyholders related to net premiums earned.

Policyholder Surplus - The sum of paid in capital, paid in and contributed surplus, and net earned surplus, including voluntary contingency reserves. It also is the difference between total admitted assets and total liabilities.

Policy or Sales Illustration - Material used by an agent and insurer to show how a policy may perform under a variety of conditions and over a number of years.

Pre-Existing Condition - A coverage limitation included in many health policies which states that certain physical or mental conditions, either previously diagnosed or which would normally be expected to require treatment prior to issue, will not be covered under the new policy for a specified period of time.

Preferred Auto - Auto coverage for drivers who have never had an accident and operates vehicles according to law. Drivers are not a risk for any insurance company that writes auto insurance, and no insurance company would be afraid to take them on as risk.

Preferred Provider Organization - Network of medical providers who charge on a fee-for-service basis, but are paid on a negotiated, discounted fee schedule.

Premium - The price of insurance protection for a specified risk for a specified period of time.

Premium Balances - Premiums and agents' balances in course of collection; premiums, agents' balances and installments booked but deferred and not yet due; bills receivable, taken for premiums and accrued retrospective premiums.

Premium Earned - The amount of the premium that has been paid for in advance that has been "earned" by virtue of the fact that time has passed without claim. A three-year policy that has been paid in advance and is one year old would have only partly earned the premium.

Premium to Surplus Ratio - This ratio is designed to measure the ability of the insurer to absorb above-average losses and the insurer's financial strength. The ratio is computed by dividing net premiums written by surplus. An insurance company's surplus is the amount by which assets exceed liabilities. For example, a company with $2 in net premiums written for every $1 of surplus has a 2-to-1 premium to surplus ratio. The lower the ratio, the greater the company's financial strength. State regulators have established a premium-to-surplus ratio of no higher than 3-to-1 as a guideline.

Premium Unearned - That part of the premium applicable to the unexpired part of the policy period.

Pretax Operating Income - Pretax operating earnings before any capital gains generated from underwriting, investment and other miscellaneous operating sources.

Pretax Return on Revenue - A measure of a company's operating profitability and is calculated by dividing pretax operating earnings by net premiums earned.

Private-Passenger Auto Insurance Policyholder Risk Profile - This refers to the risk profile of auto insurance policyholders and can be divided into three categories: standard, nonstandard and preferred. In the eyes of an insurance company, it is the type of business (or the quality of driver) that the company has chosen to taken on.

Profit - A measure of the competence and ability of management to provide viable insurance products at competitive prices and maintain a financially strong company for both policyholders and stockholders.

Protected Cell Company (PCC) - A PCC is a single legal entity that operates segregated accounts, or cells, each of which is legally protected from the liabilities of the company's other accounts. An individual client's account is insulated from the gains and losses of other accounts, such that the PCC sponsor and each client are protected against liquidation activities by creditors in the event of insolvency of another client.

»back to top
Qualified High-Deductible Health Plan - A health plan with lower premiums that covers health-care expenses only after the insured has paid each year a large amount out of pocket or from another source. To qualify as a health plan coupled with a Health Savings Account, the Internal Revenue Code requires the deductible to be at least $1,000 for an individual and $2,000 for a family. High-deductible plans are also known as catastrophic plans.

Qualified Versus Non-Qualified Policies - Qualified plans are those employee benefit plans that meet Internal Revenue Service requirements as stated in IRS Code Section 401a. When a plan is approved, contributions made by the employer are tax deductible expenses.

Qualifying Event - An occurrence that triggers an insured's protection.

Quick Assets - Assets that are quickly convertible into cash.

Quick Liquidity Ratio - Quick assets divided by net liabilities plus ceded reinsurance balances payable. Quick assets are defined as the sum of cash, unaffiliated short-term investments, unaffiliated bonds maturing within one year, government bonds maturing within five years, and 80% of unaffiliated common stocks. These assets can be quickly converted into cash in the case of an emergency.

»back to top
Reciprocal Insurance Exchange - An unincorporated groups of individuals, firms or corporations, commonly termed subscribers, who mutually insure one another, each separately assuming his or her share of each risk. Its chief administrator is an attorney-in-fact.

Re-Entry - Re-entry, which is the allowance for level-premium term policyowners to qualify for another level-premium period, generally with new evidence of insurability.

Reinsurance - In effect, insurance that an insurance company buys for its own protection. The risk of loss is spread so a disproportionately large loss under a single policy doesn't fall on one company. Reinsurance enables an insurance company to expand its capacity; stabilize its underwriting results; finance its expanding volume; secure catastrophe protection against shock losses; withdraw from a line of business or a geographical area within a specified time period.

Reinsurance Ceded - The unit of insurance transferred to a reinsurer by a ceding company.

Reinsurance Recoverables to Policyholder Surplus - Measures a company's dependence upon its reinsurers and the potential exposure to adjustments on such reinsurance. Its determined from the total ceded reinsurance recoverables due from non-U.S. affiliates for paid losses, unpaid losses, losses incurred but not reported (IBNR), unearned premiums and commissions less funds held from reinsurers expressed as a percent of policyholder surplus.

Renewal - The automatic re-establishment of in-force status effected by the payment of another premium.

Replacement Cost - The dollar amount needed to replace damaged personal property or dwelling property without deducting for depreciation but limited by the maximum dollar amount shown on the declarations page of the policy.

Reserve - An amount representing actual or potential liabilities kept by an insurer to cover debts to policyholders. A reserve is usually treated as a liability.

Residual Benefit - In disability insurance, a benefit paid when you suffer a loss of income due to a covered disability or if loss of income persists. This benefit is based on a formula specified in your policy and it is generally a percentage of the full benefit. It may be paid up to the maximum benefit period.

Return on Policyholder Surplus (Return on Equity) - The sum of after-tax net income and unrealized capital gains, to the mean of prior and current year-end policyholder surplus, expressed as a percent. This ratio measures a company's overall after-tax profitability from underwriting and investment activity.

Risk Class - Risk class, in insurance underwriting, is a grouping of insureds with a similar level of risk. Typical underwriting classifications are preferred, standard and substandard, smoking and nonsmoking, male and female.

Risk Management - Management of the pure risks to which a company might be subject. It involves analyzing all exposures to the possibility of loss and determining how to handle these exposures through practices such as avoiding the risk, retaining the risk, reducing the risk, or transferring the risk, usually by insurance.

Risk Retention Groups - Liability insurance companies owned by their policyholders. Membership is limited to people in the same business or activity, which exposes them to similar liability risks. The purpose is to assume and spread liability exposure to group members and to provide an alternative risk financing mechanism for liability. These entities are formed under the Liability Risk Retention Act of 1986. Under law, risk retention groups are precluded from writing certain coverages, most notably property lines and workers' compensation. They predominately write medical malpractice, general liability, professional liability, products liability and excess liability coverages. They can be formed as a mutual or stock company, or a reciprocal.

Secondary Market - The secondary market is populated by buyers willing to pay what they determine to be fair market value.

Section 1035 Exchange - This refers to a part of the Internal Revenue Code that allows owners to replace a life insurance or annuity policy without creating a taxable event.

Section 7702 - Part of the Internal Revenue Code that defines the conditions a life policy must satisfy to qualify as a life insurance contract, which has tax advantages.

Separate Account - A separate account is an investment option that is maintained separately from an insurer's general account. Investment risk associated with separate-account investments is born by the contract owner.

Solvency - Having sufficient assets--capital, surplus, reserves--and being able to satisfy financial requirements--investments, annual reports, examinations--to be eligible to transact insurance business and meet liabilities.

Standard Auto - Auto insurance for average drivers with relatively few accidents during lifetime.

State of Domicile - The state in which the company is incorporated or chartered. The company also is licensed (admitted) under the state's insurance statutes for those lines of business for which it qualifies.

Statutory Reserve - A reserve, either specific or general, required by law.

Stock Insurance Company - An incorporated insurer with capital contributed by stockholders, to whom earnings are distributed as dividends on their shares.

Stop Loss - Any provision in a policy designed to cut off an insurer's losses at a given point.

Subaccount Charge - The fee to manage a subaccount, which is an investment option in variable products that is separate from the general account.

Subrogation - The right of an insurer who has taken over another's loss also to take over the other person's right to pursue remedies against a third party.

Successive Periods - In hospital income protection, when confinements in a hospital are due to the same or related causes and are separated by less than a contractually stipulated period of time, they are considered part of the same period of confinement.

Surplus - The amount by which assets exceed liabilities.

Surrender Charge - Fee charged to a policyholder when a life insurance policy or annuity is surrendered for its cash value. This fee reflects expenses the insurance company incurs by placing the policy on its books, and subsequent administrative expenses.

Surrender Period - A set amount of time during which you have to keep the majority of your money in an annuity contract. Most surrender periods last from five to 10 years. Most contracts will allow you to take out at least 10% a year of the accumulated value of the account, even during the surrender period. If you take out more than that 10%, you will have to pay a surrender charge on the amount that you have withdrawn above that 10%.

Term Life Insurance - Life insurance that provides protection for a specified period of time. Common policy periods are one year, five years, 10 years or until the insured reaches age 65 or 70. The policy doesn't build up any of the nonforfeiture values associated with whole life policies.

Tort - A private wrong, independent of contract and committed against an individual, which gives rise to a legal liability and is adjudicated in a civil court. A tort can be either intentional or unintentional, and liability insurance is mainly purchased to cover unintentional torts.

Total Admitted Assets - This item is the sum of all admitted assets, and are valued in accordance with state laws and regulations, as reported by the company in its financial statements filed with state insurance regulatory authorities. This item is reported net as to encumbrances on real estate (the amount of any encumbrances on real estate is deducted from the value of the real estate) and net as to amounts recoverable from reinsurers (which are deducted from the corresponding liabilities for unpaid losses and unearned premiums).

Total Annual Loan Cost - The projected annual average cost of a reverse mortgage including all itemized costs.

Total Loss - A loss of sufficient size that it can be said no value is left. The complete destruction of the property. The term also is used to mean a loss requiring the maximum amount a policy will pay.

»back to top
Umbrella Policy - Coverage for losses above the limit of an underlying policy or policies such as homeowners and auto insurance. While it applies to losses over the dollar amount in the underlying policies, terms of coverage are sometimes broader than those of underlying policies.

Unaffiliated Investments - These investments represent total unaffiliated investments as reported in the exhibit of admitted assets. It is cash, bonds, stocks, mortgages, real estate and accrued interest, excluding investment in affiliates and real estate properties occupied by the company.

Underwriter - The individual trained in evaluating risks and determining rates and coverages for them. Also, an insurer.

Underwriting - The process of selecting risks for insurance and classifying them according to their degrees of insurability so that the appropriate rates may be assigned. The process also includes rejection of those risks that do not qualify.

Underwriting Expenses Incurred - Expenses, including net commissions, salaries and advertising costs, which are attributable to the production of net premiums written.

Underwriting Expense Ratio - This represents the percentage of a company's net premiums written that went toward underwriting expenses, such as commissions to agents and brokers, state and municipal taxes, salaries, employee benefits and other operating costs. The ratio is computed by dividing underwriting expenses by net premiums written. A company with an underwriting expense ratio of 31.3% is spending more than 31 cents of every dollar of net premiums written to pay underwriting costs. It should be noted that different lines of business have intrinsically differing expense ratios. For example, boiler and machinery insurance, which requires a corps of skilled inspectors, is a high expense ratio line. On the other hand, expense ratios are usually low on group health insurance.

Underwriting Guide - Details the underwriting practices of an insurance company and provides specific guidance as to how underwriters should analyze all of the various types of applicants they might encounter. Also called an underwriting manual, underwriting guidelines, or manual of underwriting policy.

Unearned Premiums - That part of the premium applicable to the unexpired part of the policy period.

Uninsured Motorist Coverage - Endorsement to a personal automobile policy that covers an insured collision with a driver who does not have liability insurance.

Universal Life Insurance - A combination flexible premium, adjustable life insurance policy.

Usual, Customary and Reasonable Fees - An amount customarily charged for or covered for similar services and supplies which are medically necessary, recommended by a doctor or required for treatment.

Utilization - How much a covered group uses a particular health plan or program.

Valuation - A calculation of the policy reserve in life insurance. Also, a mathematical analysis of the financial condition of a pension plan.

Valuation Reserve - A reserve against the contingency that the valuation of assets, particularly investments, might be higher than what can be actually realized or that a liability may turn out to be greater than the valuation placed on it.

Variable Annuitization - The act of converting a variable annuity from the accumulation phase to the payout phase.

Variable Life Insurance - A form of life insurance whose face value fluctuates depending upon the value of the dollar, securities or other equity products supporting the policy at the time payment is due.

Variable Universal Life Insurance - A combination of the features of variable life insurance and universal life insurance under the same contract. Benefits are variable based on the value of underlying equity investments, and premiums and benefits are adjustable at the option of the policyholder.

Viatical Settlement Provider - Someone who serves as a sales agent, but does not actually purchase policies.

Viator - The terminally ill person who sells his or her life insurance policy.

Voluntary Reserve - An allocation of surplus not required by law. Insurers often accumulate such reserves to strengthen their financial structure.

Waiting Period - See "elimination period."

Waiver of Premium - A provision in some insurance contracts which enables an insurance company to waive the collection of premiums while keeping the policy in force if the policyholder becomes unable to work because of an accident or injury. The waiver of premium for disability remains in effect as long as the insured is disabled.

Whole Life Insurance - Life insurance which might be kept in force for a person's whole life and which pays a benefit upon the person's death, whenever that might be.

Yield on Invested Assets (IRIS) - Annual net investment income after expenses, divided by the mean of cash and net invested assets. This ratio measures the average return on a company's invested assets. This ratio is before capital gains/losses and income taxes.
 	
Absolute Liability: Liability for damages even though fault or negligence cannot be proven. 
 	
Accident: An event or occurrence which is unforeseen and unintended.  
 	
Act of God: A flood, earthquake or other non preventable accident resulting from natural causes that occur without any human intervention.  
 	
Activities of Daily Living: A list of activities, normally including mobility, dressing, bathing, toileting, transferring, and eating which are used to assess degree of impairment and determine eligibility for some types of insurance benefits. 
 	
Actual Cash Value (ACV): 1) The cost of replacing or restoring property at prices prevailing at the time and place of the loss, less depreciation, however caused; 2) replacement cost minus depreciation.  
 	
Additional insured: A person, company or entity protected by an insurance policy in addition to the insured.  
 	
Adjuster: A person who investigates and settles losses for an insurance carrier.  
 	
Adjusting: The process of investigating and settling losses with or by an 
insurance carrier.  

	
Amendment: A formal document changing the provisions of an insurance policy signed jointly by the insurance company officer and the policy holder or his authorized representative.  
 	
Application: A signed statement of facts made by a person applying for insurance and then used by the insurance company to decide whether or not to issue a policy. The application becomes part of the insurance contract when the policy is issued. 
 	
Arbitration: Arbitration: A form of alternative dispute resolution where an unbiased person or panel renders an opinion as to responsibility for or extent of a loss. 
 	
Arson: The willful and malicious burning of, or attempt to burn, any structure or other property, often with criminal or fraudulent intent.  
 	
Assets: All funds, property, goods, securities, rights of action, or resources of any kind owned by someone.  
 	
Assignment: The legal transfer of one person's interest in an insurance policy to another person. 
 	
Automobile Insurance Plan: One of several types of "shared market" mechanisms where persons who are unable to obtain such insurance in the voluntary market are assigned to a particular company, usually at a higher rate than the voluntary market. Formerly called "Assigned Risk."  
 	
Automobile Liability Insurance: Protection for the insured against financial loss because of legal liability for car-related injuries to others or damage to their property. 
 	
Automobile Physical Damage Insurance: Coverage to pay for damage to or loss of an insured automobile resulting from collision, fire, theft, or other perils.  

Benefits: The amount payable by the insurance company to a claimant, assignee or beneficiary under each coverage.  
 	
Binder: A written or oral contract issued temporarily to place insurance in force when it is not possible to issue a new policy or endorse the existing policy immediately. A binder is subject to the premium and all the terms of the policy to be issued. 
 	
Binding Receipt: A receipt given for a premium payment accompanying the application for insurance. If the policy is approved, this binds the company to make the policy effective from the date of the receipt. 
 	
Blanket Medical Expense: A provision which entitles the insured person to collect up to a maximum established in the policy for all hospital and medical expenses incurred, without any limitations on individual types of medical expenses. 
 	
Boat Owners Package Policy: A special package policy for boat owners that combines physical damage insurance, medical expense insurance, liability insurance, and other coverage's in one contract.  
 	
Boiler and Machinery Insurance: Coverage for loss arising out of the operation of pressure, mechanical, and electrical equipment. It covers loss of the boiler and machinery itself, damage to other property, and business interruption losses.  
 	
Bond: A certificate issued by a government or corporation as evidence of a debt. The issuer of the bond promises to pay the bondholder a specified amount of interest for a specified period and to repay the loan on the expiration (maturity) date. 
	
Book of Business: the number, size and type of accounts (policyholders) that an agent "owns."  
 	
Broker: A marketing specialist who represents buyers of property and liability insurance and who deals with either agents or companies in arranging for the coverage required by the customer.  
 	
Burglary: Breaking and entering into another person's property with felonious intent.  
 	
Burglary and Theft Insurance: Coverage against property losses due to 
burglary, robbery, or larceny. 

 	
Business Insurance: A policy which primarily provides coverage of benefits to a business as contrasted to an individual. It is issued to indemnify a business for the loss of services of a key employee or a partner who becomes disabled.  
 	
Business Interruption Insurance: Protection for a business owner against losses resulting from a temporary shutdown because of fire or other insured peril. The insurance provides reimbursement for lost net profits and necessary continuing expenses. 
Cancellation: The discontinuance of an insurance policy before its normal expiration date, either by the insured or the company.  
 	
Captive Insurance Company: A company owned solely or in large part by one or more non- insurance entities for the primary purpose of providing insurance coverage to the owner or owners. 
 	
Captive Insurer: Insurance companies established and owned by a parent firm in order to insure its loss exposures while reducing premium costs, providing easier access to a re-insurer, and perhaps easing tax burdens. Cargo Insurance: Type of ocean marine insurance that protects the shipper of the goods against financial loss if the goods are damaged or lost.  
 	
Casualty Insurance: Insurance concerned with the insider's legal liability for injuries to others or damage to other persons' property; also encompasses such forms of insurance as plate glass, burglary, robbery and workers' compensation.  
 	
Catastrophe: Event which causes a loss of extraordinary magnitude, such as a hurricane or tornado. 
	
Causes-of-loss Form: Form added to commercial property insurance policy that indicates the causes of loss that are covered. There are four causes-of-loss forms: basic, broad, special, and earthquake. 
	
Certificate of Insurance: A statement of coverage issued to an individual insured under a group insurance contract, outlining the insurance benefits and principal provisions applicable to the member.  
 	
Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriter (CPCU): Professional who has attained a high degree of technical competency in property and liability insurance and has passed ten professional examinations administered by the American Institute for Property and Liability Underwriters.  
 	
Choice no-fault: Allows auto insureds the choice of remaining under the tort system or choosing no-fault at a reduced premium.  
 	
Claim: A request for payment of a loss which may come under the terms of an insurance contract. 
 	
Claims Adjustor: Person who settles claims: an agent, company adjustor, 
independent adjustor, adjustment bureau, or public adjustor.  

	
Coinsurance: 1) A provision under which an insured who carries less than the stipulated percentage of insurance to value, will receive a loss payment that is limited to the same ratio which the amount of insurance bears to the amount required; 2) a policy provision frequently found in medical insurance, by which the insured person and the insurer share the covered losses under a policy in a specified ratio, i.e., 80 percent by the insurer and 20 percent by the insured.  
 	
Collision Insurance: Protection against loss resulting from any damage to the policyholder's car caused by collision with another vehicle or object, or by upset of the insured car, whether it was the insured's fault or not.  
 	
Combined Ratio: Basically, a measure of the relationship between dollars spent for claims and expenses and premium dollars taken in; more specifically, the sum of the ratio of losses incurred to premiums earned and the ratio of commissions and expenses incurred to premiums written. A ratio above 100 means that for every premium dollar taken in, more than a dollar went for losses, expenses, and commissions.  

Commercial General Liability Policy (CGL): A broad commercial policy that covers all liability exposures of a business that are not specifically excluded. Coverage includes product liability, completed operations, premises and operations, and independent contractors. Commercial liability policy drafted by the Insurance Services Office containing two coverage forms, an occurrence form and a claims-made form.  
 	
Commercial Lines: Insurance for businesses, organizations, institutions, governmental agencies, and other commercial establishments.  
 	
Community Property: A special ownership form requiring that one half of all property earned by a husband or wife during marriage belongs to each. Community property laws do not generally apply to property acquired by gift, by will, or by descent.  
 	
Comparative Negligence: Under this concept a plaintiff (the person bringing suit) may recover damages even though guilty of some negligence. His or her recovery, however, is reduced by the amount or percent of that negligence.  
 	
Completed Operations: Liability arising out of faulty work performed away from the premises after the work or operations are completed. Applicable to contractors, plumbers, electricians, repair shops, and similar firms.  
 	
Comprehensive Automobile Insurance: Protection against loss resulting from damage to the insured auto, other than loss by collision or upset.  
 	
Comprehensive  
 	
Comprehensive Personal Liability Insurance: Protection against loss arising out of legal liability to pay money for damage or injury to others for which the insured is responsible. It does not include automobile or business operation liabilities.  
 	
Compulsory Auto Liability Insurance: Insurance laws in some states required motorists to carry at least certain minimum auto coverage’s. This is called "compulsory" insurance.  
	
Compulsory Insurance Law: Law protecting accident victims against irresponsible motorists by requiring owners and operators of automobiles to carry certain amounts of liability insurance in order to license the vehicle and drive legally within the state.  
 	
Concealment: Deliberate failure of an applicant for insurance to reveal a material fact to the insurer.  
 	
Concurrent Causation: Legal doctrine that states when a property loss is due to two causes, one that is excluded and one that is covered, the policy provides coverage. 
Conditions: Provisions inserted in an insurance contract that qualify or place limitations on the insurer's promise to perform. 
Declination: The insurer's refusal to insure an individual after careful evaluation of the application for insurance and any other pertinent factors.  
 	
Deductible: An amount which a policyholder agrees to pay, per claim or per accident, toward the total amount of an insured loss.  
 	
Dependent Benefits: Social Security benefits available to the spouse or children of a Social Security beneficiary.  
 	
Depreciation: A decrease in the value of property over a period of time due to wear and tear or obsolescence. Depreciation is used to determine the actual cash value of property at time of loss. (See Actual Cash Value)  
 	
Direct Loss: Financial loss that results directly from an insured peril.  
 	
Disability: a physical or a mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of an individual. It may be partial or total. (See Partial Disability; Total Disability.)  
 	
Disability Benefit: Periodic payments, usually monthly, payable to participants under some retirement plans, if such participants are eligible for the benefits and become totally and permanently disabled prior to the normal retirement date.  
 	
Disability Income Insurance: A form of health insurance that provides periodic payments to replace income when an insured person is unable to work as a result of illness, injury, or disease.  
 	
Dismemberment: Loss of body members (limbs), or use thereof, or loss of sight due to injury. 
 	
Dividend: A return of part of the premium on participating insurance to reflect he difference between the premium charged and the combination of actual mortality, expense and investment experience. Such premiums are calculated to provide some margin over the anticipated cost of the insurance protection.  
 	
Dollar Threshold: In no-fault auto insurance states with the dollar threshold, it prevents individuals from suing in tort to recover for pain and suffering unless their medical expenses exceed a certain dollar amount.  
 	
Dramshop Law: Law that imputes negligence to the owner of a business that sells liquor in the case that an intoxicated customer causes injury or property damage to another person. Usually excluded from general liability policies.  
 	
Dwelling Property 1: Property insurance policy that insures the dwelling at actual cash value, other structures, personal property, fair rental value, and certain other coverage’s. Covers a limited number of perils.  
 	
Dwelling Property 2: Property insurance policy that insures the dwelling and other structures at replacement cost. It adds additional coverage’s and has a greater list of covered perils than the Dwelling Property 1 policy.  
 	
Dwelling Property 3: Property insurance policy that covers the dwelling and other structures against direct physical loss from any peril except for those perils otherwise excluded. However, personal property is covered on a named-perils basis. 

Earned Income: Employment income derived from salary, wages, commissions, or fees. 
 	
Effective Date: The date on which the insurance under a policy begins. 
 	
Elements of a Negligent Act: Four elements an injured person must show to prove negligence: existence of a legal duty to use reasonable care, failure to perform that duty, damages or injury to the claimant, and proximate cause relationship between the negligent act and the infliction of damages.  
 	
Embezzlement: Fraudulent use or taking of another's property or money which has been entrusted to one's care.  
 	
Endorsements: An additional piece of paper, not a part of the original contract, which cites certain terms and which, when attached to the original contract, becomes a legal part of that contract. An amendment of the policy usually by means of a rubber stamp or rider.  
 	
Errors and Omissions Insurance: Liability insurance policy that provides protection against loss incurred by a client because of some negligent act, error, or omission by the insured.  
 	
Estoppels: Legal doctrines that prevent a person from denying the truth of a previous representation of fact, especially when such representation has been relied on by the one to whom the statement was made.  
 	
Excess and Surplus Insurance: (1) Insurance to cover losses above a certain amount, with losses below that amount usually covered by a regular policy. (2) Insurance to cover an unusual or one-time risk, e.g., damage to a musician's hands or the multiple perils of a convention, for which coverage is unavailable in the normal market. (See also "Umbrella liability" and "surplus lines.")  
 	
Exclusions: Specific conditions or circumstances listed in the policy for which the policy will not provide benefit payments.  
 	
Exclusive Remedy Doctrine: Doctrine in workers compensation insurance which states that workers compensation benefits should be the exclusive or sole source of recovery for workers who have a job related accident or disease; doctrine has been eroded by legal decisions. 
 	
Experience Modification Factor: Used in workers compensation rating to reflect the degree to which a particular employer has experience that is better or worse that expected for that industry. Weighted by employer's credibility factor.  
 	
Experience Rating: The process of determining the premium rate for a group risk, wholly or partially on the basis of that group's experience.  
 	
Exposure Unit: Unit of measurement used in insurance pricing.  
 	
Extended Non-owned Coverage: Endorsement that can be added to an automobile liability insurance policy that covers the insured while driving any non owned automobile on a regular basis.  
	
Extortion: Surrender of property away from the premises as a result of a threat to do bodily harm to the named insured, relative, or invitee who is being held captive.  
 
-F-
	
Fair Rental Value: Amount payable to an insured homeowner for loss of rental income due to damage that makes the premises uninhabitable.  
 	
Fidelity Bond: A form of protection which reimburses an employer for losses caused by dishonest or raudulent acts of employees.  
 	
Fiduciary: A person who holds something in trust for another.  
 	
Fire Insurance: Coverage for losses caused by fire and lightning, plus resultant damage caused by smoke and water.  
 	
Fire Legal Liability: Liability of a firm or person for fire damage caused by negligence of and damage to property of others. First party claim: a demand made by a policyholder reporting an insured event directly to his company.  
 	
First Party Coverage: An insurance coverage under which the policyholder collects compensation for losses from the insured's own insurer rather than from the insurer of the person who caused the accident. 
 	
Floaters: Insurance policies that cover property that can be moved from one location to another for both transportation perils and perils affecting property at a fixed location. 
 	
Flood Insurance: Coverage against loss resulting from the flood peril, widely available at low cost under a program developed by the private industry and the federal government.  
 	
Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) is a compilation information that 1. objectively assists in measuring functional abilities and consistency of efforts, 2. provides further data for the determination of permanent work capacity and 3. helps to promote safe work parameters. 
	
Future Increase Option: A provision found in some policies that allows the insured to purchase additional disability income insurance at specified future dates regardless of the insured's physical condition.  


-G-
General Liability Insurance: Coverage that pertains, for the most part, to claims arising out of the insured's liability for injuries or damage caused by ownership of property, manufacturing operations, contracting operations, sale or distribution of products, and the operation of machinery, as well as professional services.  
 	
Glass Insurance: Protection for loss of or damage to glass and its appurtenances.  
 	
Grace Period: A specified period after a premium payment is due, in which the policyholder may make such payment, and during which the protection of the policy continues. 
 	
Gross Negligence: the intentional failure to perform a manifest duty in reckless disregard of the consequences as affecting the life or property of another  
 	
Group Insurance: Insurance written on a number of people under a single master policy, issued to their employer or to an association with which they are affiliated.  
 	
Guaranty Fund: A fund, derived from assessments against solvent insurance companies, to absorb losses of claimants against insolvent insurance companies.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 
-H-
 	
Hazard: Condition that creates or increases the chance of loss.  
 	
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO): An organization that provides a wide range of comprehensive health care services for a specified group at a fixed periodic payment. The HMO can be sponsored by the government, medical schools, hospitals, employers, labor unions, consumer groups, insurance companies, and hospital medical plans.  
 	
High Risk Automobile Insurer: Company that specializes in insuring motorists who have poor driving records or have been canceled or refused insurance.  
	
Hold Harmless Clause: Clause written into a contract by which one party agrees to release another party from all legal liability, such as a retailer who agrees to release the manufacturer from legal liability if the product injures someone.  

 	
Homeowners Policy: A package of insurance providing home owners with a broad range of property and liability coverage’s.  

 	
Hurricane: A tropical storm marked by extremely low barometric pressure and circular winds with a velocity of 75 miles an hour or more.  


Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-I-
 	
Imputed Negligence: Case in which responsibility for damage can be transferred from the negligent party to another person, such as an employer.  
 	
Indemnification: Compensation to the victim of a loss, in whole or in part, by payment, repair, or replacement.  
 	
Indemnity: Legal principle that specifies an insured should not collect more than the actual cash value of a loss but should be restored to approximately the same financial position as existed before the loss. 
 	
Independent Adjustor: Claims adjustor who offers his or her services to 
insurance companies and is compensated by a fee.  

 	
Independent Agent: an independent business person who usually represents two or more insurance companies in a sales and service capacity and who is paid on a commission basis. 
 	
Independent Medical Examination (IME): A medical examination used to determine whether an injured party claiming injuries is actually injured or to the extent they claim. Independent medical examiners are registered medical practitioners who provide impartial medical assessments of an injured worker to assist decisions about: accepting a claim, ongoing liability and the worker’s level of fitness for work. 
 	
Inland Marine Insurance: A broad form of insurance, generally covering articles in transit as well as bridges, tunnels and other means of transportation and communication. Besides goods in transit (generally excepting trans-ocean), it includes numerous "floater" policies, such as those covering personal effects, personal property, jewelry, furs, fine arts, and other items.  
 	
Inspection Report: A report (usually written) of an investigation of an applicant, conducted by an independent agency that specializes in insurance investigations. The report covers such matters as occupation, financial status, health history, and moral problems.  

Insurability: Acceptability to the company of an applicant for insurance.  
 	
Insurable Risk: The conditions that make a risk insurable are (a) the peril insured against must produce a definite loss not under the control of the insured, (b) there must be a large number of homogeneous exposures subject to the same perils, (c) the loss must be calculable and the cost of insuring it must be economically feasible, (d) the peril must be unlikely to affect all insureds simultaneously, and 

(e) the loss produced by a risk must be definite and have a potential to be financially serious. 
 	
Insurance: A system under which individuals, businesses, and other organizations or entities, in exchange for payment of a sum of money (a premium), are guaranteed compensation for losses resulting from certain perils under specified conditions. 
 	
Insurance Company: An organization chartered to operate as an insurer. Any corporation primarily engaged in the business of furnishing insurance protection to the public.  
 	
Insurance Guaranty Funds: State Funds that provide for the payment of unpaid claims of insolvent insurers.  
 	
Insurance Services Offices (ISO): Major rating organization in property and liability insurance that drafts policy forms for personal and commercial lines of insurance and provides rate data on loss costs for property and liability insurance lines. 
 	
Insured: A person or organization covered by an insurance policy, including the "named insured" and any other parties for whom protection is provided under the policy terms.  

 	
Insurer: The party to the insurance contract who promises to pay losses or benefits. Also, any corporation engaged primarily in the business of furnishing insurance to the public. 

-J-
 	
Joint-and-Several Liability: A legal principle that permits the injured party in a tort action to recover the entire amount of compensation due for injuries from any tort-feasor who is able to pay, regardless of the degree of that party's negligence.  
 	
Joint Tenants: A form of joint property ownership with right of survivorship, i.e., in which the survivors automatically own the share of a deceased co-owner.  
 	
Joint Underwriting Association: One of several types of "shared market" mechanisms used to make automobile insurance available to persons who are unable to obtain such insurance in the regular market. JUAs also have been created in some states to help alleviate availability problems in the fields of medical malpractice and commercial insurance.  
 	
Joint Underwriting Association: A device used to provide insurance to those who cannot obtain insurance in the voluntary market. Certain companies (called carriers) issue policies at one rate level and handle claims, but the ultimate costs are borne by all companies writing insurance in that state.  
 	
Judicial Bond: Type of surety bond used for court proceedings and guaranteeing that the party bonded will fulfill certain obligations specified by law, for example, fiduciary responsibilities. 

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-L-
 	
Lapse: The termination or discontinuance of an insurance policy due to non­payment of a premium. 
 	
Lapsed Policy: A policy terminated for non-payment of premiums. The term is sometimes limited to a termination occurring before the policy has a cash or other surrender value. 
 	
Larceny-theft: The unlawful taking, carrying, leading or riding away of another person's property.  
 	
Last Clear Chance Rule: Statutory modification of the contributory negligence law allowing the claimant endangered by his or her own negligence to recover damages from a defendant if the defendant has a last clear chance to avoid the accident but fails to do so.  
 	
Liability: Any legally enforceable obligation.  
 	
Liability Insurance: Insurance covering the policyholder's legal liability resulting from injuries to other persons or damage to their property. Provides protection for the insured against loss arising out of legal liability to third parties.  
 	
Liability Limits: The stipulated sum or sums beyond which an insurance 
company is not liable to protect the insured.  

 	
Liability Without Fault: Principle on which workers compensation is based, holding the employer absolutely liable for occupational injuries or disease suffered by workers, regardless of who is at fault. 
 	
Lifetime Disability Benefit: A benefit to help replace income lost by an insured person as long as he/she is totally disabled, even for a lifetime. Disability income payable for the life of the insured as long as he is totally disabled.  
 	
Liquidation: Dissolving a company by selling its assets for cash.  
 	
Long-Term Disability Income Insurance: Insurance issued to an employer (group) or individual to provide a reasonable replacement of a portion of an employee's earned income lost through serious and prolonged illness or injury during the normal work career. (See also Integration.)  
 	
Loss: The happening of the event for which insurance pays. 
 	
Loss Ratio: The percent which losses bear to premiums for a given period. The ratio of claims to premiums. It may be calculated in several different ways, using paid premiums or earned premiums, and using paid claims with or without changes in claim reserves and with or without changes in active life reserves.  
 	
Loss Reserve: The amount set up as the estimated cost of a claim. (See IBNR Reserve) 

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-M- 

Malingering: The practice of feigning illness or inability to work in order to collect insurance benefits. 
 	
Malpractice: Improper care or treatment by a physician, hospital, or other 
provider of health care. 

 	
Malpractice Insurance: Coverage for a professional practitioner, such as a doctor or a lawyer, against liability claims resulting from alleged malpractice in the performance of professional services.  
 	
Managed Care: Health care systems that integrate the financing and delivery of appropriate health care services to covered individuals by arrangements with selected providers to furnish a comprehensive set of health care services, explicit standards for selection of health care providers, formal programs for ongoing quality assurance and utilization review, and significant financial incentives for members to use providers and procedures associated with the plan.  
 	
Market Price (or Market Value): The price at which a item can be bought or sold at any particular time. 
 	
Material Damage: Insurance against damage to a vehicle itself. It includes automobile comprehensive, collision, fire and theft. Material damage and physical damage are terms that often are used inter- changeably. 
 	
Maximum Medical Improvement (MMI) Maximum Medical Improvement (MMI) is a treatment plateau in each person’s healing process. It can mean that the patient has fully recovered from the injury or that the patient’s medical condition has stabilized to the point that no major medical or emotional change can be expected in the injured workers’ condition. This occurs despite continuing medical treatment or rehabilitative programs the injured worker partakes in. 
 	
Medical Payments Insurance: A coverage, available in various liability insurance policies, in which their insurer agrees to reimburse the insured and others, without regard for the insured's liability, for medical or funeral expenses incurred as the result of bodily injury or death by accident under specified conditions. 
 	
Misrepresentation: A false, incorrect, improper, or incomplete statement of a material fact, made in the application or claim process.  
 	
Mutual Insurance Company: An insurance company in which the ownership and control is vested in the policyholders and a portion of surplus earnings may return to policyholders in the form of dividends. No capital stock exists.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-N-

Named Perils: Coverage in a property policy that provides protection against loss from only the perils specifically listed in the policy rather than protection from physical loss. Examples of named perils are fire, windstorm, theft, smoke, etc.  
 	
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC): The association of insurance commissioners of various states formed to promote national uniformity in the regulation of insurance. 
 	
Negligence: Failure to use the care that a reasonable and prudent person would have used under the same or similar circumstances.  
 	
No-Fault: A type of auto insurance mechanism whereby the right to sue another party for damages caused by negligence is limited and, in exchange, expanded first party benefits are offered. 
 	
No-fault Automobile Insurance: A form of insurance by which a person's financial losses resulting from an automobile accident are paid by his or her own insurer regardless of who was at fault. 
 	
Non-disabling Injury: An injury which may require medical care, but does not result in loss of working time or income.  
-O-
Occupational Hazards: Occupations which expose the insured to greater than normal physical danger by the very nature of the work in which the insured is engaged, and the varying periods of absence from the occupation, due to the disability, that can be expected.  
 	
Occurrence: An accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general, harmful conditions, that results in bodily injury or property damage during the period of an insurance policy.  
 	
Occurrence policy: A liability insurance policy that covers claims arising out of occurrences that take place during the policy period, regardless of when the claim is filed.  
 	
Overhead Insurance: A type of short-term disability income contract that reimburses the insured person for specified, fixed monthly expenses, normal and customary in the operation and conduct of his/her business or office.  


-P-
Partial Disability: The result of an illness or injury which prevents an insured from performing one or more of the functions of his/her regular job. A benefit sometimes found in disability income policies providing for the payment of reduced monthly income in the event the insured cannot work full time and/or is prevented from performing one or more important daily duties pertaining to his occupation. 
 	
Peril: The cause of a possible loss, such as fire, windstorm, theft, explosion, or riot. 
 	
Persistency: A term used to refer to the length of time insurance remains 
continuously in force. 

 	
Personal Articles Floater: A form of coverage designed to meet the needs for insurance on property of a moveable nature. The coverage usually protects against all physical loss, subject to special exclusions and conditions. Examples of property covered include jewelry, furs, silverware, and fine arts.  
 	
Personal Injury Protection (PIP): First-party no-fault coverage in which an insurer pays, within the specified limits, the wage loss, medical, hospital and funeral expenses of the insured. 
 	
Personal Lines: Those types of insurance, such as auto or home insurance, for individuals or families rather than for businesses or organizations.  
 	
Personal representative: A person appointed through the will of a deceased or by a court to settle the estate of one who dies.  
 	
Physical Damage: Damage to or loss of the auto resulting from collision, fire, theft or other perils. 
 	
Policy: The printed legal document stating the terms of the insurance contract that is issued to the policyholder by the company. A contract of insurance. The legal document issued by the company to the policyholder, which outlines the conditions and terms of the insurance; also called the policy contract or the contract. 
 	
Policy Term: That period for which an insurance policy provides coverage. 
 	
Policyholder: The person who owns a life insurance policy. This is usually the insured person, but it may also be a relative of the insured, a partnership or a corporation. A person who pays a premium to an insurance company in exchange for the insurance protection provided by a policy of insurance. 
 	
Premium: The sum paid by a policyholder to keep an insurance policy in force.  
 	
Primary Insurance: Insurance that pays compensation for a loss ahead of any other insurance coverage’s the policyholder may have.  
 	
Probate: The court supervised process of validating or establishing a distribution for assets of a deceased including the payment of outstanding obligations.  
 	
Probationary Period: A period from the policy date to a specified time, usually 15 to 30 days, during which no sickness coverage is effective. It is designed to eliminate a sickness actually contracted before the policy went into effect.  
 	
Product Liability: legal liability incurred by a manufacturer, merchant, or distributor because of injury or damage resulting from the use of its product.  
 	
Product Liability Insurance: Protection against financial loss arising out of the legal liability incurred by a manufacturer, merchant, or distributor because of injury or damage resulting from the use of a covered product.  
 	
Proof of Loss: Documentation presented to the insurance company by the insured in support of a claim so that the insurer can determine its liability under the policy. Documentary evidence required by an insurer to prove a valid claim exists. It usually consists of a claim form completed by the insured and the insured's attending physician. For medical expense insurance itemized bills must also be included. 
 	
Property Damage Coverage: An agreement by an insurance carrier to protect an insured against legal liability for damage by an insured automobile to the property of another. 
	
Property Insurance: Insurance providing financial protection against the loss of, or damage to, real and personal property caused by such perils as fire, theft, windstorm, hail, explosion, riot, aircraft, motor vehicles, vandalism, malicious mischief, riot and civil commotion, and smoke.  
 	
Proximate Cause: The dominating cause of loss or damage; an unbroken chain of events between the occurrence and damage.  
 	
Punitive Damages: a court awarded amount that exceeds the economic losses and general damages of a defendant and is intended solely to punish the plaintiff  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 
-Q-
Qualification Period: The period during which the insured must be totally disabled before becoming eligible for residual disability benefits.  
Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-R-
 	
Rate: The pricing factor upon which the insurance buyer's premium is based.  
 	
Rated Policy: Sometimes called an "extra risk" policy, an insurance policy issued at a higher-than-standard premium rate to cover the extra risk where, for example, an insured has impaired health or a hazardous occupation.  
 	
Regulation: Supervision of business practices by a governmental entity.  
 	
Rehabilitation: (1) Restoration of a totally disabled person to a meaningful occupation, (2) a provision in some long- term disability policies that provides for continuation of benefits or other financial assistance while a totally disabled insured is retraining or attempting to resume productive employment.  
 	
Reimbursement: The payment of the expenses actually incurred as a result of an accident or sickness, but not to exceed any amount specified in the policy. 
 	
Reinstatement: The resumption of coverage under a policy which has lapsed.  
 	
Reinsurance: Assumption by one insurance company of all or part of a risk undertaken by another insurance company. The acceptance by one or more insurers, called re-insurers, of a portion of the risk underwritten by another insurer who has contracted for the entire coverage. The purchase of insurance by an insurance company from another insurance company (re-insurer) to provide it protection against large losses on cases it has already insured. 
 	
Renewal: Continuance of coverage under a policy beyond its original term by the insurer's acceptance of the premium for a new policy term. 
 	
Renter's Policy: A package type of insurance that includes coverage similar to a homeowner’s policy to cover the personal property of a renter or tenant in a building. 
 	
Replacement: The substitution of health insurance coverage from one policy contract to another. 
 	
Replacement Cost: The cost to repair or replace property at construction costs prevailing at time of loss; the cost to repair or rebuild property without considering depreciation. (See Actual Cash Value) 
 	
Representation: Statements made by an applicant in the application, which he represents as being substantially true to the best of his knowledge and belief, but which are not warranted as exact in every detail. 
	
Rescission: Termination of an insurance contract by the insurer on the grounds of material misstatement on the application for insurance. The action of rescission must take place within the contestable period or Time Limit on Certain Defenses but takes effect as of the date of issue of the policy, thus voiding the contract from its inception. 
 	
Reservation of Rights: An arrangement whereby an insurer defends a case without commitment to provide coverage in the event that the facts disclosed during the trial reveal that the occurrence is not covered.  
 	
Reserve: (1) an amount representing liabilities kept by an insurer to provide for future commitments under policies outstanding. (2) An amount allocated for a special purpose. Note that a reserve is usually a liability and not an extra fund.  
 	
Revocable Trust: A trust that can be terminated or revoked by its creator.  

Rider: (1) A document which amends the policy or certificate. It may increase or decrease benefits, waive the condition of coverage or in any other way amend the original contract. (2) A special policy provision or group of provisions that may be added to a policy to expand or limit the benefits otherwise payable. (3) A document that modifies the policy. It may increase or decrease benefits, waive a condition or coverage, or in any other way amend the original contract.  

Right of Survivorship: at the death of one co-owner of property, that person's interest in the property automatically passes to the surviving joint tenant or tenants. 
	
Risk: The chance of loss. Also used to refer to the insured or to property covered by a policy. (2) Any chance of loss. (3) A term used to refer to a person or the peril insured.  	
Risk Classification: The process by which a company decides how its premium rates for life insurance should differ according to the risk characteristics of individuals insured (e.g., age, occupation, sex, state of health) and then applies the resulting rules to individual applications. (See: Underwriting)  
	
Robbery: The taking of property from a person by force or threat of violence.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

-S-

Salvage: Recovery made by an insurance company by the sale of property which has been taken over from the insured as a part of loss settlement.  

Self-Insurance:(1) A program for providing group insurance with benefits financed entirely through the internal means of the policyholder, in place of purchasing coverage from commercial carriers. (2) A form of risk financing through which a firm assumes all or a part of its own losses.  
 	
Settlement Options: The several ways, other than immediate payment in cash, which a policyholder or beneficiary may choose to have policy benefits paid.  
 	
Short-Term Disability Income Insurance: The provision to pay benefits to a covered disabled person as long as he/she remains disabled up to a specified period not exceeding two years.  
 	
Special Risk Insurance: Coverage for risks or hazards of a special or unusual nature. 
 	
Spouse's Benefit: Payments to the surviving spouse of a deceased employee, usually in the form of a series of payments upon meeting certain requirements and usually terminating with the survivor's remarriage or death.  
 	
State Fund: A fund set up by a state government to provide a specific line or lines of insurance. Some state permit private insurers to compete with the state fund. 
	
State Insurance Department: A department of a state government whose duty is to regulate the business of insurance and give the public information on insurance.  
 	
Strict Liability: Liability for damages even though fault or negligence cannot be proven. 
 	
Subrogation: Process by which one insurance company seeks reimbursement from another company or person for a claim it has already paid.  
 	
Substandard Insurance: Insurance issued with an extra premium or special restriction to those persons who do not qualify for insurance at standard rates.  
 	
Substandard Risk: An individual, who, because of health history or physical limitations, does not measure up to the qualification of a standard risk.  

Surplus Lines: (1) A risk or a part of a risk for which there is no normal insurance market available. (2) Insurance written by non-admitted insurance companies.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 

 	
Temporary Total Disability (TTD): This benefit is payable when the injured worker is unable to work during a period when he/she is under active medical care and has not yet reached what is called “maximum medical improvement” (MMI). By virtue of simple common sense, once “maximum medical improvement” has been reached the condition can no longer be categorized as temporary. 
	
Temporary Partial Disability (TPD): An employee may be eligible for temporary partial disability when he or she is able to do some work but is still recuperating from the effects of the injury, and is, thus, temporarily limited in the amount or type of work which can be performed compared to the pre-injury work. 
	
Tenants in common: A form of joint property ownership in which the owners may have unequal shares and which does not involve a right of survivorship.  
 	
Third Party: The claimant under a liability policy. So called because the person making the claim is not one of the two parties, insured and insurer, to the insurance contract. 
 	
Third party claim: a demand made by a person against a policyholder of another company and any payment that will be made by that company.  
	
Threshold (No-Fault): The point, measured in money, time or other ways, beyond which tort liability can be established. Until that point is reached, reparations must be paid within the provisions of the no-fault plan, with no recourse to the courts. 
 	
Time Limit: The period of time during which a notice of claim or proof of loss must be filed. 
 	
Tort: A civil wrong, other than a breach of contract, for which a court of law will afford legal relief, i.e. harming another by an act of negligence in driving an auto.  
 	
Total Disability: An illness or injury which prevents an insured person from continuously performing every duty pertaining to his/her occupation or engaging in any other type of work. (This wording varies among insurance companies.)  

Travel Accident Policy: A limited contract covering only accidents while an insured person is traveling, usually on a commercial carrier.  

Turnover Rate: The rate at which employees terminate covered service other than by death or retirement. Expected future turnover can be taken into account in translating contributions into benefits.  
Twisting: The practice of inducing by misrepresentation, or inaccurate or incomplete comparison, a policyholder in one company to lapse, forfeit or surrender his insurance for the purpose of taking out a policy in another company.  
-U-
Umbrella Liability: Insures losses in excess of amounts covered by other 
liability insurance policies; also protects the insured in many situations not 
covered by the usual liability polices. 


Underwriter: (1) a company that receives the premiums and accepts responsibility for the fulfillment of the policy contract; (2) the company employee who decides whether or not the company should assume a particular risk; (3) the agent who sells the policy. 

Underwriting: The process of selecting risks for insurance and determining in what amounts and on what terms the insurance company will accept the risk.  

Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage: A form of insurance that pays the policy holder and passengers in his/her car for bodily injury caused by the owner or operator of an uninsured or inadequately insured automobile.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 
-V-
 	
Verbal Threshold: In no-fault auto insurance states with a verbal threshold, victims are allowed to sue in tort only if their injuries meet certain verbal descriptions of the types of injuries that render one eligible to recover for pain and suffering. 

Viatical Settlement: Payment of a portion of the proceeds from life insurance to an insured who is terminally ill.  

Dictionary of Insurance Terms 
-W-
 	
Waiver: An agreement attached to a policy which exempts from coverage certain disabilities or injuries that otherwise would be covered by the policy.  
 	
Workers Compensation: A system established under state law that provides payments, without regard to fault, to employees injured in the course and scope of their employment.  
	
Workers' Compensation Insurance: Insurance against liability imposed on certain employers to pay benefits and furnish care to employees injured, and to pay benefits to dependents of employees killed in the course of or arising out of their employment.  


Actuary               A professional trained in the mathematics of insurance and risk management, including the calculations of premiums, policy reserves and other values.

Agent                 The insurance company representative who sells policies on behalf of the insurer. An independent agent represents more than one company; a captive agent represents only one company.

Applicant             Prospective policyholder; completes and signs the insurance application.

Assets                The items on a balance sheet showing the value of property owned.

Assuming Company      An insurance company that accepts the risk transferred from another insurance company in a reinsurance transaction.

Billing Clerk         Person responsible for revenue billing.

Broker                Represents the interests of the insured in searching for insurance coverage at the lowest cost and highest benefit to the insured. The broker may also be an agent of the insurer for purposes of policy collection and delivery of the policy.

Catastrophic Event    An event that causes loss to many people at once. Also called catastrophe, several e amples are tornados, hurricanes and plane crashes.

Cede                  To transfer to a reinsurer all or part of the insurance or reinsurance written by a ceding company.

Ceding Company        The company that transfers its risk to a reinsurer. Also called the Cedant.

Claim Adjuster        The person who investigates insurance claims for losses and recommends an effective settlement.

Claim Service         Also called CSR; they are responsible for clerical completion of all claim files.
Representative

Clause                A section of an insurance policy dealing with various coverages, e clusions, duties of the insured, locations covered and conditions that terminate coverage.

Combined Ratio        The sum of the loss ratio and the e pense ratio.

Commercial Lines      Insurance for businesses, professionals and commercial establishments.

Compulsory            Mandatory or enforced.

Contract              Legally binding agreement between two parties who wish to e change some sort of consideration (anything of value, e.g. money or goods).

Coverage              The insurance afforded under a contract of insurance.

Declaration           Part of the insurance policy that identifies the named insured, policy period and limit of insurance.

Deductible            The amount of money the policyholder must pay on a loss.

Direct Loss           A loss which is a direct consequence of a peril.

Disability Insurance  Covers wage loss for the disabled person.

Earned remiums        The portion of the premium for which protection has been provided. If an insured has an annual premium and makes monthly payments, each month the insurer earns 1/12th of the premium.

Endorsement           A written agreement attached to the insurance policy which alters the provisions of the contract.

Exclusion             A provision in the insurance policy that indicates what is denied coverage.

Expense Ratio         The ratio of all operating e penses divided by the premiums written.

Exposure to Loss      The policyholder's possibility of loss.

Fire Insurance        The foundation of today's property insurance. Covers loss to property caused by a fire or lightning.

Flood Insurance       Insurance to reimburse property owners from loss due to the peril of flood.

Fortuitous Losses     Unintentional loss occurring by accident or chance.

Frequency of Loss     Refers to the actual numbers or times the same or similar loss occurs.

Frequency-Severity    Matri used to determine which type of risk treatment is appropriate for a risk.
Matrix

General Liability     Insurance to protect an owner or operator of a business from a wide range of liability e posures.

Hazard                A condition that creates or increases the chance or severity of a loss due to a peril.

Homeowners Policy      Insurance against property and liability perils to which a homeowner or renter is exposed.

IBNR                  Incurred but not reported losses. This is for losses which have occurred during a stated period, usually a
                      calendar year, but have not yet been reported to the insurer.

Indemnification       Insurance principle which states that the insured, after a loss, should be restored in whole or in part by
                      payment, repair or replacement by the insurer.

Independent  Adjuster         An adjuster hired by the insurer to investigate and settle claims on behalf of the insurance company.


Indirect Loss         A loss resulting from a peril but not caused directly by that peril.

Insurance             Economic device whereby the individual or business pays a cost (premium) in e change for protection against financial loss. The agreement is a contract also known as an insurance policy.

Insured               The policyholder protected in case of a loss or claim.

Insurer               The party who pays for losses in an insurance arrangement.

Law of Large  Numbers        States that the larger the number of risks or e posures, the more closely the actual loss e perience will approach the e pected loss e perience.

Legal Hazard          Characteristics of the legal system that increase the frequency or severity of losses.

Legislated            Determined by law.

Liability             The obligation of financial responsibility that may arise by negligence, contract or tort committed.

Liability Insurance   Protects the policyholder against a suit or claim for another's bodily injury and property damage.

Loss                  An undesired and unplanned reduction of financial value.

Loss Control          The process of identifying and acting upon situations which may lead to losses.

Loss Ratio            A formula used by insurers to relate loss e penses to earned premiums.

Loss Reserve          Money set aside to pay losses.

Marine Insurance      Covers loss or damage to ships, cargo or injuries to ship crew members.

Moral Hazard          Dishonesty or character defects that increase the chance of loss.

Morale Hazard         Carelessness or indifference to a loss because of the e istence of insurance.

Negligence            Failure to use that degree of care which an ordinary person of reasonable prudence would use to protect others from harm.

P&C                   Property and Casualty Insurance.

 Peril                 A cause of loss.

 hysical Hazard       A physical condition that increases the chance of loss.

 Policy                The written insurance contract that may include all clauses, riders and endorsements.

 Policy Service        Also called PSR; they are responsible for premium rating and issuing policy files.
Representative

     Policyholder                             The insured protected in case of a loss or claim.

     Pooling                                  The method by which each member of an insurance pool shares in every risk written by other pool members.

    Premium                                  The price of insurance protection, paid by the policyholder to the insurer.

    Premium Auditor                          Person that reviews charges to ensure that the premium paid is fair for the coverage furnished.

     Private Insurance                        Voluntary programs that are available from the government or private firms.

     Proximate Cause                          The immediate or actual cause of loss or damage.

     Public Adjuster                          Hired by the insured, an adjuster who operates independently from insurance companies to investigate and settle claims.

   Re-Inspector                              Person who double-checks the work of the original adjuster.

   Reserves                                  The funds an insurance company sets aside to pay for reported but outstanding claims.

   Rider                                     An endorsement to an insurance policy that modifies its clauses and provisions, including or e cluding certain conditions from coverage.

   Risk                                      The uncertainty concerning the occurrence of a financial loss.

   Risk Avoidance                            Avoiding the risk altogether.

   Risk Control                              Techniques used to control the frequency and magnitude of losses.

   Risk Control  Consultant                            A person with e pertise in risk management techniques that reduce the frequency and severity of losses.
   

   Risk Management                           The identification of loss e posures and treatments for those e posures.

   Risk Retention                            Retaining or bearing the risk.

   Risk Transfer                             Transferring the financial consequences of a loss to another party, such as an insurance company.

   Severity of Loss                          Refers to the size or cost of the loss to the organization.

   Tort                                      An injury or wrong committed against an individual.

   Umbrella Policy                            Insurance policy over and above a basic liability policy.

   Underwriter                               The professional responsible to assess the merits of each risk and decide a suitable premium for accepting all or part of the risk.

   Underwriting                              The process of scrutinizing a risk to determine whether or not to insure that risk.

   Underwriting    Assistant                          Assists the underwriter. Also called underwriting technician or underwriting associate.
   

   Waiver                                    Relinquishment of a legal right to act.

   Workers'                                  Benefits paid to an employee as a result of occupational injury.
   Compensation

   Written Premiums         The total premiums on all policies written by an insurer during a specified period of time, regardless of what portions have been earned.

Adjuster. A person who settles insurance claims. An adjuster may be an insurance company employee or an independent operator.
Adjustment. The settlement of a claim; financial premium determination.
Agent's authority. The authority placed in an agent by the insurance company; the extent to which the
agent may act on behalf of the company. This authority is defined by a contract between the agent and
the company.
All-risk. A term commonly used to describe broad forms of property or liability coverage. It is misleading because no property or liability policy truly provides an all-risk coverage -- a policy will invariably contain some exclusions.
Appraisal. An estimate of value loss or damage.
Assigned risk. A risk that has been declined by one or more companies. Such a risk may be assigned to
designated companies by a recognized authority. The operation is called an assigned risk plan.
Assured. The insured; the one for whom insurance is written.
Basic benefits. Generally all benefits offered by a group health plan except major medical. Basic benefits
may include hospital surgical physician care diagnostic lab and X-ray radiation therapy dental expenses and supplemental accident coverage.
Beneficiary. A person who will receive policy benefits.
Benefit formula. Defines the amounts of life insurance that may be purchased for employees in a specific classification (e.g. salary occupation length of service etc.).
Benefit. That amount payable under an insurance policy because of an accident injury or illness.
Binder. An agreement usually written whereby one party agrees to insure another party pending receipt of a final action upon the application.
Business interruption. Insurance covering the loss of earnings resulting from the destruction of property; called use and occupancy insurance.
Cancellation. The termination of an insurance contract by either the insurance company or the insured.
Carrier. An insurance company.
Cash deductible. The amount of money the insured must pay for covered expenses before certain
benefits can begin.
Cash value. The value in cash of a life insurance policy.
Casualty. An accident occurrence or event or the person to whom it happens; the general term applied to insurance coverages for an accident occurrence or event.
Certlet. A booklet describing the benefits and all the provisions of a group policy that affect the insured.
The certlet becomes a certification of insurance when the person is eligible for the insurance. It is then the legal document that proves the person is actually insured.
Claim. A request by the insured for benefits under an insurance policy.
Coinsurance. Two or more entities providing insurance protection and sharing in losses.
Compensation. Wages salaries awards fees or commissions; any return in payment for a financial loss.
Comprehensive. A loosely used term signifying broad or extensive insurance coverage.
Contributory. A group insurance plan paid partly by employees and partly by the employer.
Contributory negligence. Partial responsibility for one's own injury or damage.
Coverage. The insurance protection provided by the policy.
Declarations. That part of an insurance policy containing the information about the applicant listed on the insurance application.
Deductible. An amount the insured must pay before insurance benefits will be paid.
Discount. A reduction applied to an insurance premium.
Draft. A financial instrument similar to a check frequently used by insurance companies to pay losses.
Effective date. The date a policy is put in force; the inception date.
Endorsement. A written amendment affecting the declaration insuring agreements exclusions or
conditions of an insurance policy; a rider.
Evidence of insurability. Medical proof from either a questionnaire or a physical examination that an
applicant employee or dependent is healthy and therefore insurable.
Examiner. An individual who reviews evaluates and processes claims.
Exclusion. That which is expressly eliminated from the coverage under an insurance policy.
Expiration date. The date an insurance policy terminates.
Exposure. Person or property to whom injury or damage will cause an economic loss.
Face amount. In life insurance the amount of basic coverage stated on the face of the policy.
Grace period. A period beyond the premium due date during which the premium may be paid and the
insurance will be continued in force.
Group insurance. Insurance covering a group of employees.
Hazards. A condition that creates or increases the probability of a loss.
Health insurance. Commonly called accident and health insurance protection against financial loss from a personal accident or illness.
Incurred loss. A loss that while not yet paid has been sustained and for which reserves have been
established to pay in the future.
Indemnity. Insurance protection that will place the insured in the same financial position as before a loss was sustained.
Inspection. An examination by those having authority. An insurance company usually reserves the right to inspect any property it insures.
Insurance. Protection against loss. The insured sacrifices a small certain loss (the premium) for protection against a large uncertain loss (e.g. an accident fire or death). The insurance company assumes the risk by employing the law of large numbers and the principle of risk spreading.
Insured. The entity whose life or property is protected by the insurance. The one for whom insurance is written.
Lapse. To fail to continue an insurance policy; to cease to provide insurance protection.
Liability. Being bound by law and justice to do something that may be enforced by the courts.
Limits. The value or amount of a policy; the greatest amount that can be collected under the policy.
Loss. In insurance the amount the insurer is required to pay because of the insured's loss.
Multi-peril insurance. An insurance policy that provides coverage against many perils. Sometimes called a package policy.
Occurrence. A continuance of a repeated exposure to conditions that result in injury.
Peril. Anything that may cause a loss.
Policy. A legal contract of insurance.
Policyholder. The owner of the policy; the one who purchases the policy and pays the premiums.
Policy period. The term for which insurance remains in force sometimes definite sometimes not.
Premium. The cost of an insurance policy; the charge the policyholder pays for the insurance protection.
Property. The thing owned; real property is real estate and things attached to it; anything else is personal property.
Property damage. Physical damage to property.
Provisions. The terms or conditions of an insurance policy.
Rate. Cost per unit of insurance.
Reinstate. To restore coverage after it has been canceled or suspended.
Reinsurance. Insurance placed by an underwriter in another company to reduce the amount of the risk his or her company has assumed.
Renew. To continue; to replace as with a new policy.
Rider. An endorsement.
Schedule of benefits. The amount of insurance for which each classification of employee is eligible.
(Classifications can be based on salary wage occupation or length of service.)
Self-insurance. An arrangement whereby instead of purchasing an insurance policy a party maintains a
reserve fund for self-protection against a loss.
Settlement option. The way in which money for the death benefit of an insurance policy will be paid to a beneficiary.
Surety. A guarantee that a person normally called the principal will perform according to a statute or a
contract. Surety offers protection to a third party normally called an obligee.
Underwriter. The insurance company; a party assuming risk; the person performing the underwriting
function.
Void. Of no force; null.

Waiting period. A period immediately after the inception of the policy during which no benefits will be paid even if a loss occurs. Pertains to health insurance.

Waiver of premium. In life insurance a provision that states that if the insured becomes disabled and the disability appears total and permanent the insurance policy will continue in full force without further payment or premium.

Absolute Liability: Liability that exists and is imposed upon a party, even though that party committed no negligence or fault.
Absolute liability is most often imposed when the circumstances of the operation, product, or activity are considered highly
hazardous or dangerous.
Accident: An event or occurrence that is unintended, unforeseen, and unexpected; something which could not be considered as
a foreseeable occurrence and consequence of an undertaking; a casualty or mishap.
Accident Frequency: The determination of how often the rate or frequency of accidents occurs at a particular operation, site,
location, or to the insured as a whole for a specified period of time for the exposure units involved. These ratios and
calculations are used to determine and verify the projected claims and loss exposure a risk may experience in order to price and
set rates, claims services, and loss control services needed. Use of accident frequency ratios over a period of time for a
specified risk also may be used to determine if loss trends are improving and if the loss control services are effective.
Accident Prevention: All the ways and means used to avoid the occurrence of an accident or to reduce its consequences if it
does occur, such as the control of personal performance, machine performance, and physical environment, including the
training needed to reduce the number of accidents and cost of accidental injuries. Accident prevention is one of the less
publicized functions of risk managers and insurers, many of which improve safety in industry, the home, and on the roads
through safety engineering and research. Also called loss prevention, safety engineering, accident control, or loss prevention.
Accident Report: Either the report that is used to document the time, cause, results, injuries, parties, and other pertinent facts
of an accident for insurance purposes or a similar type of report prepared by law enforcement persons as a result of an accident
Accidental Death And Dismemberment Insurance (AD&D): A specific type of life insurance policy that pays benefits in
the case of the death or dismemberment of the insured from accidental causes. If dismemberment occurs, benefits are paid on a
periodic basis, such as weekly, bi-weekly or monthly for the injury; and the amount of payment of the benefits is based on the
type and severity of the dismemberment.
Account Executive: A person whose duty is to specifically service an account or group of accounts for an agency or brokerage
firm.
Accounts Receivable Insurance: Coverage that protects businesses against their inability to collect their accounts receivable
because of the loss of supporting records that have been destroyed by a covered cause of loss. Also covered are the extra
collection expenses that are incurred because of such loss or damage and other reasonable expenses incurred to re-establish
records of accounts receivable after loss or damage.
ACORD Forms: Standard application forms, used nationwide, for gathering the necessary data needed to rate, classify and
underwrite requested insurance coverages. These forms come under the auspices of the nonprofit ACORD Insurance
Association
Actual Cash Value: The basis of loss settlement in property insurance policies, which takes into consideration factors such as
replacement value less depreciation, market value, rental value, the use of the building, the area in which it is located,
obsolescence, assessed valuation, and any other factor that would have an effect upon the value. A working rule-of-thumb
definition, however, is "replacement cost new at the time of loss, less depreciation." (See Replacement Cost Insurance.)
Actual Total Loss: When insured property is so badly damaged by a covered cause of loss that it is not repairable or
recoverable or when there is so little remaining of the salvageable or repairable nature that it no longer has any value, it is
considered an actual total loss. This usually signifies the maximum settlement possible under the terms of the policy.
Actuarial Report: A report outlining current conditions or future requirements of an insurer, self-insured or pension fund
necessary to meet its obligations. The report is prepared and signed by an actuary.
Actuary: A social mathematician who uses mathematical skills to define, analyze and solve complex business and social
problems involving insurance and employee benefit programs. The work of actuaries involves the various contingencies that
face human beings: birth, marriage, sickness, accident, loss of property, legal liability, retirement, and death, and the financial
effects which these and other contingencies have on various insurance and benefit programs. Many of these programs involve
long-range financial obligations, for which actuarial forecasts are fundamental in maintaining a sound financial basis:
ratemaking, premium and loss reserving, in-vestment valuation, pension benefits, and insurance statistics, among others.
Add-ons: Additional coverages that have been added to a basic policy to enhance the coverage. While some add-ons are
pertinent, viable expansions of coverage, others can be fads that are sometimes unnecessary or frivolous.
Additional Death Benefit: Life insurance benefits offered should death occur during a specific time period or as a result of
specific causes.
Additional Extended Coverage: Additional causes of loss added to property policies which include items such as vandalism
and malicious mischief, water from ruptured plumbing and heating systems, glass breakage, ice, snow, and freezing, and
falling trees and collapses. This coverage is rarely used and has been replaced by the broad or special cause of loss forms as
they relate to property insurance.
Additional Named Insured: A party, other than the first named insured, that has been shown as an insured in the policy
Declarations or in an addendum to the policy Declarations or by endorsement once the policy has been issued. This party has
the status of named insured.
Additional Premium: When a policy has been issued subject to rate, subject to audit, subject to inspection, is assessable, or
when the policy is endorsed, the additional premium is the extra amount due, over and above the initial premium stated in the
Declarations, because of the increased exposures, higher rates, retrospective rate calculations, additional coverage, or premium
audit.
Adhesion Contract: A type of contract in which the standard provisions offered are not subject to negotiation, but are on a
"take it or leave it" basis. Most insurance policies are contracts of adhesion since the terms and conditions of the contract are
drawn or written by the insurer with no input from the insured that must adhere to the terms and conditions as set forth, and
who has little recourse to negotiate for better benefits or terms. If there is any ambiguity when a contract of adhesion has been
written, court decisions and rulings will be in favor of the party who did not have control of the wording of the provisions; in
this case the insured.
Adjacent: One building is adjacent to another if it is very close to another building although not actually touching it, with no
intervening building.
Adjoining: When a building is so located that it touches another building
Adjustable Policy: A policy in which the exposure basis is a variable (such as sales or payroll), which can be determined only
at the end of the policy term.
Adjustable Premium: Policies issued by an insurer that do not guarantee the premium upon renewal. At each subsequent
renewal the policy may be re-rated and bear premiums that may or may not be substantially different than the previous period
premium.
Adjuster: One who determines the amount of loss suffered. A "company" adjuster represents the company. A "public" adjuster
represents the policyholder. Either may hire an “independent” adjuster.
Adjustment: The process of handling and settling claims by determining the amount of a loss and agreeing on the amount
requested by a policyholder or claimant because of a loss or damages suffered. Also referred to as claims adjustment.
Adjustment Income: A life insurance benefit that provides the beneficiary with income often used during the interim period
while other living finances are arranged, hence, the term adjustment income.
Admiralty: A term used to encompass anything to do with maritime operations.
Admiralty Courts: Section of the federal or national court system that deals with matters pertaining to vessels, crew, and their
cargoes navigating on interstate or international waters. Maritime procedures, precedents and rules are different in admiralty
courts than in other courts.
Admiralty Liability: The liability posed by the combination of both common and statutory law, as it relates to maritime
operations and activities.
Admiralty Proceeding: A legal proceeding relating specifically to maritime law (including ocean marine insurance issues)
and handled in a maritime court.
Admitted Company: A foreign or alien insurance company which has been licensed by the insurance department of the state
in question and which, thereby, is authorized to conduct business within that state to the extent licensed. Also called an
admitted market or admitted insurer.
Admitted Liability: An aviation specific coverage for passengers or guests aboard aircraft, which precludes the need for those
guests or passengers to prove the liability of the insured owner or operator of the aircraft in order to recover for damages
suffered in an accident. This coverage is normally written with a maximum limit per seat, and the passenger or guest can
recover up to that amount.
Advance Premium: A provisional or deposit premium charged at the start of a policy term, with the final premium determined
after the policy has expired.
Adverse Selection: The insuring of one or more risks with a higher chance of loss than that contemplated by the applicable
insurance rate. The selection of such risks is adverse because the rate is inadequate. Also called anti-selection.
Advertising Injury: Damages or injury sustained by a claimant in the course of the advertising activities of the insured that
included such injury as libel, slander, violation of the right to privacy, misappropriation of advertising ideas, or the
infringement of copyright.
Advisory Organization: One of the three basic forms of insurance organizations: rating bureaus, advisory organizations, and
trade associations. Rating bureaus make and file rates; loss costs, rating plans, schedules, manuals and forms for members,
subscribers and service purchasers who choose to use them. Advisory organizations perform advisory functions for insurers
relative to these rating bureau activities and, like rating bureaus, are licensed by state insurance departments and subject to
examination and other regulation. Trade associations are cooperative organizations to protect the business interests of their
member insurers, producers, adjusters, attorneys, or other groups. Either a rating bureau or an advisory association can function
as a statistical organization, and the function of advisory organizations and trade associations can overlap. Distinctions in
functions can best be appreciated by understanding that, historically, rating and advisory organizations were licensed and
regulated under state rating laws because of the public interest in the cooperative activities of insurers, relative to pricing and
the need for regulation, in order to replace application of antitrust laws. (See Rating Bureau, and Trade Association.)
Affiliated Company: A company that is operated independently from other related companies but has some type of common
ownership with those companies, such as the same set or sub-set of owners or stockholders
Affirmative Warranty: An acknowledgment or affirmation by the insured as to the credibility or verification of certain facts
or conditions pertinent to the issuance of the policy.
Age Adjustment Clause: With respect to a life insurance policy, it is the provision that allows the insurer to adjust the death
benefit payment if the age of the insured was misrepresented, and if that misrepresentation has been proved.
Agency: A business office whose function is the sales of insurance and insurance products. An agency may be owned or run by
a general agent, manager, independent agent, or company manager. The principal is responsible for the statements and actions
of agents performing within the scope of authorization specified in the agency agreement. (See Captive Agent, General Agent,
and Independent Agent.)
Agency Contract: The legal contract drawn to establish the terms and conditions used as the basis of the relationship between
an insurance company and its agency force.
Agency-Company Organization For Research And Development (ACORD) : A nonprofit insurance facility dedicated to
serving the independent agency system in the USA by developing and maintaining standard application forms, providing
electronic data interchange standards and other support of agency automation. ACORD is located in Pearl River, NY
Agent: One who has the authority to act for another. In insurance language, an agent is the person who sells insurance by
contacting the policyholder. By contract and by law, the agent is endowed with many of the powers of the company itself.
There are various types of agents, based upon the contractual relationship with the insurer they represent. (See Independent
Agent, Exclusive Agent, and Broker.)
Agent Of Record: The agent who has been recognized by the insured or customer as his or her authorized representative for
handling the specified insurance transactions.
Aggregate Benefits: The maximum amount an insured is able to collect under a single policy regardless of the number of
claims, injuries, accidents, or number of insureds.
Aggregate Excess Insurance: Coverage developed for operations that prefer to self-insure a portion of their losses, capping at
a specified amount. When the accumulation of losses exceeds the threshold amount during any annual period, this type of
insurance covers the remainder of losses up to the policy limit.
Agreed Amount: The amount of coverage that the insurer and insured have mutually agreed to be the value of the property at
the time the insurance is purchased.
Air Cargo Liability Insurance: Coverage for the legal liability of an air carrier for loss or damage to cargo while in its care, custody or control.
Air Passenger Insurance: Life insurance purchased at airports by passengers on scheduled airlines. The face value of the policy is paid to the beneficiary in the event of death on that particular flight. Also called air travel insurance.
Aircraft Hull Insurance: Covers any loss arising out of physical damage to the aircraft itself in flight, on the ground, or both.
Aircraft Insurance: A type of package policy for aircraft which combines both the property insurance for the hull and coverage for bodily injury and property damage liability arising out of the ownership or use of the insured aircraft.
Aircraft Liability Insurance: Covers the insured for both bodily injury and property damage liability arising out of the ownership or use of the insured aircraft.
Aircraft Passenger Liability Insurance: Covers the liability resulting from bodily injury and sickness or disease suffered by any passenger arising out of the ownership or use of the insured aircraft.
Aleatory Contract: A contract in which the consideration or monetary value between the parties to the contract is not equal. In the case of insurance contracts, the insured or policyholder pays a premium and may collect nothing from the insurer if no loss occurs. On the other hand, if a loss does occur, the insured or policyholder may collect considerably more than the amount of the premium.
Alien Company: An insurance company that is domiciled or incorporated in a country outside the United States, but which
conducts either insurance or reinsurance operations in the U.S
Alienated Premises Exclusion: An exclusion designed to eliminate coverage for property damage liability to premises alienated or sold by the insured.
Alienation Clause: A policy clause that details the terms, conditions, or requirements that will apply should property that is the subject of the insurance be sold and title transferred during the policy term. Two of the most common examples are the alienation clause in a mortgage insurance policy that requires the balance of a loan be paid should the property be sold, or a property insurance policy that clarifies that the insurance coverage cannot be assigned or transferred to the new owners when the property is sold.
All-lines Insurer: Insurers offering property, liability, life, and health coverages. Governmental and business constraints prevent an insurer from literally providing every single possible line of insurance.
All-risk Policy: A policy that covers loss caused by any cause of loss which is not excluded, as contrasted to "named peril"
policies that protect against certain perils named in the policies. Usual to certain types of property and marine insurance contracts, the term "all risk" frequently appears in quotes, since such coverage includes "almost" all risks (i.e., all but those excluded).
Allied Lines: Those coverages that are frequently written with fire insurance (e.g., sprinkler leakage, earthquake and water damage).
Amount Subject: Also known as maximum possible loss (MPL). The largest percentage of the insured property that could possibly be destroyed by the insured perils. Normally this amount would be all the property within the four walls of a structure plus loss to adjacent property due to its proximity. An amount subject or MPL estimate is invariably the ultimate in pessimism, but it is a most important concept in underwriting large risks in order to compute rates and to understand the need for capacity,
as well as to appreciate all exposures. Maximum foreseeable loss (MFL) is used periodically and has substantially the same meaning.
Ancillary Benefits: Benefits in a health insurance policy that are available to pay for unscheduled service and miscellaneous charges such as medication, bandages, etc.
Animal Mortality Insurance: A type of animal life insurance that provides benefits for the death of the specified animal for any cause unless otherwise excluded. Coverage is normally very broad and the exclusions few, if any at all.
Anniversary Date: The anniversary date of policy inception as listed in the policy Declarations, and each subsequent expiration and renewal.
Annual Aggregate Deductible: The total amount an insured is responsible to retain for the sum of all losses up to a specified deductible during an annual policy period. Once the annual aggregate deductible has been reached by the accumulation of payment by the insured, the insurer responds to the remaining claims up to the policy limits.
Annual Renewal Agreement: Certain policy forms contain a clause whereby the company agrees to renew the policy for a certain number of times at some specified rate.
Annualization: A provision in multi-year policies giving the insurer the option to re-rate the policy on each subsequent renewal or anniversary date, using the rates in effect as of the anniversary date.
Annuitant: The owner or beneficiary of an annuity.
Annuity Certain: An annuity that guarantees to pay income for a specified period of time, whether or not the annuitant is still alive.
Annuity Due: An annuity in which the income benefits are paid at the start of the annuity period instead of the end.
Annuity Period: With respect to the scheduled payments of income for an annuity, this is the amount of time between each payment.
Annuity Table: The mortality table used to set rates for annuity policies.
Annuity With Period Certain: An annuity that pays income benefits for the life of the insured, but with an additional built-in guarantee committing the payment of income benefits for a minimum number of years, whether or not the insured survives for that minimum number of years.
Application: In all types of insurance requiring it, a written statement by a prospective policyholder that gives the information the company relies upon when underwriting, rating, and issuing the insurance. In England this is called a proposal.
Apportionment: The process that determines how much each policy on a risk must pay when there is more than one policy involved in a loss. Apportionment refers directly to the proportioning or splitting of the loss amount.
Appraisal: Valuation of property.
Appurtenant Structures: Other structures or real property of lesser value that are located on the same premises as the main building insured under a property insurance policy. Common examples are small metal service buildings or storage sheds.
Arbitration Clause: Language in most policies of insurance providing that, in the event the company and the claimant are unable to agree on the amount due after loss, the matter shall be submitted to disinterested parties for solution. One party is appointed by the insured, one by the company, and the two appointed arbitrators then pick a third, the "umpire."
Assessable Policies: A type of insurance that may require the policyholder to contribute in the event the insurer becomes unable to pay its losses. Confined to certain mutual companies. Also known as assessable insurance.
Assessment: The charge levied by an insurer writing an assessable policy (as sold by some mutual insurers), in addition to the policy premium, in the event the insurer becomes unable to pay its total losses.
Assessment Mutual: A mutual insurance company that has the option or right to assess or charge policyholders additional premiums when losses or expenses have increased beyond the predictions set at policy inception.
Assets: All the property and resources of a business.
Assigned Risk Plan: An association of insurers in a given state in which automobile risks unable to get insurance in the voluntary market are shared among subscribing insurers in proportion to the amount of automobile liability insurance each insurer writes in that state. All companies writing these classes are required to participate in this activity, currently administered by the Automobile Insurance Plans Service Office, headquartered at Johnston, RI. Also known as automobile insurance plans, these plans sometimes take the form of joint underwriting associations.
Assignment: Transferring property rights to another. Insurance policies may thus be assigned or transferred to another, but usually this requires the consent of the insurer.
Assignment Of Benefits: A health insurance benefit payment option where an insured may assign policy benefits directly to the health provider. The provider is paid directly, less any deductible. Any balance is paid by the insured.
Assumed Liability: Contractual liability that arises from an agreement between people, as opposed to liability that arises from common or statute law.
Assumption Of Risk: A common law defense used by employers in which an employee assumes the risks for the hazards normally associated with a type of employment when that employee accepts employment. This defense is not available with workers compensation laws.
Attachment: An attachment is a rider, endorsement, or any other modification made to a policy that in some way changes, broadens, restricts, or clarifies the basic coverage provided.
Attachment Point: The limit or amount at which reinsurance attaches or comes into play. The ceding company retains the limit or amount below that point.
Attestation Clause: The clause in a policy that identifies the required signature of an officer of the insurer authorizing the coverage.
Attorney-in-fact: One who has been given specific authority to act for another in certain clearly defined matters. Often used in insurance to refer to the person or entity operating a "reciprocal exchange" or "inter-insurance exchange."
Attractive Nuisance: A condition that, although normally harmless, may nevertheless attract those (usually children) who do not understand its uses and may cause injury. Although it may be proper to maintain such condition, the owner is nevertheless required to take such means as may be necessary to prevent its causing injury to innocent people, e.g., an empty swimming pool, an unattended tractor, or an upended ladder.
Audit Provision: A policy condition or provision that details the right of the insurer to examine or audit the records of the insured at any time during the term of the insurance policy issued or for up to three years after the expiration of that policy, to determine the actual exposure that insured places on the insurer.
Authorized Company Or Insurer: An insurer licensed by the state insurance department to write certain types of insurance in that state. A synonym for licensed or admitted company.
Automatic Cover: Policy protection applied simultaneously with the acquisition of new property similar to that already covered by the policy. Certain policies provide that they will assume liability for property other than that covered at the commencement of the contract if and when the policyholder acquires ownership or in the event of some similar happening that the policy describes.
Automatic Reinstatement: After a loss has been paid or the damaged property restored, most policies provide that the amount of insurance will automatically return to its original amount. Some policies are reduced by the amount of loss paid but can be reinstated for additional premium.
Automobile Liability Insurance: Protection for loss incurred through legal liability for bodily injury and damage to property of others caused by accidents arising out of ownership, maintenance, or use of an automobile.
Automobile Medical Payments Insurance: An optional coverage under an automobile liability policy which pays the medical expenses of the policyholder and any of the passengers injured by the insured automobile, irrespective of who was responsible for the accident. This was originally called "basic medical payments." In addition, it pays the medical expenses of the policyholder and members of the immediate family injured while passengers in any other automobile or when struck by an automobile. In some no-fault states, medical payments insurance has been replaced by personal injury protection (PIP); in other states, it may supplement no-fault insurance. (See Personal Injury Protection (PIP).)
Average Rate: Since rates generally apply to individual items (e.g., a building or specific contents), when two or more such items are combined in a single "blanket" amount of insurance, the value of each item is multiplied by its own rate. The sum of the premiums thus determined is divided by the total amount of insurance on all the items to produce an average rate for all the insured property.
Avoidance Of Risk: One of the tools of the risk management process, where steps are taken by an insured to remove a process, cause of loss or hazard and thus avoid the chance of loss. Steps include changing processes or even ending a specific exposure, if necessary.
Accidental Death Benefit (Auto or Health Insurance):
Provision for payment of a dollar amount—usually equal to the face amount of insurance—if the insured is killed in an accident. This coverage is available either as a health insurance policy, or as an auto insurance option with some companies. (Also see Accidental Death Benefit [Life Insurance].)
Accidental Death Benefit (Life Insurance):
Provision under a life insurance policy for payment of an additional amount—usually equal to the face amount of insurance—if the insured is killed in an accident. Popularly known as “double indemnity.” (Also see Accidental Death Benefit [Auto or Health Insurance].)
Accident and Health Insurance:
See Health Insurance.
Account Receivables:
See Receivables.
Act of God (Act of Nature):
Perils that occur naturally such as tornadoes, earthquakes and hurricanes.
Actual Cash Value:
Insurance under which the amount payable is the current replacement cost of the property new; reduced by an allowance for depreciation, wear and obsolescence.
Actuary:
A highly specialized mathematician professionally trained in the risk aspects of insurance, whose functions include the calculations involved in determining proper insurance rates, evaluating reserves, and in various aspects of insurance research.
Additional Living Expense:
A property coverage which pays for the increased expense of living while the insured’s residence is being rebuilt or repaired after damage from an insured peril. Examples are the extra cost of housing the insured’s family in a hotel, dining in restaurants, etc.
Adjuster:
A person who investigates and settles losses for an insurance carrier.
Admitted Assets:
Assets recognized and accepted by state insurance laws in determining the solvency of insurers and reinsurers. To make it easier to assess an insurance company’s financial position, state statutory accounting rules do not permit certain assets to be included on the balance sheet. Only assets that can be easily sold in the event of liquidation or borrowed against, and receivables for which payment can be reasonably anticipated, are included in admitted assets. (See Assets.)
Admitted Company (Carrier):
An insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in a particular state.
Adverse Selection:
The tendency of those exposed to a higher risk to seek more insurance coverage than those at a lower risk. Insurers react either by charging higher premiums or not insuring at all, as in the case of floods. (Flood insurance is provided by the federal government but sold mostly through the private market.) In the case of natural disasters, such as earthquakes, adverse selection concentrates risk instead of spreading it. Insurance works best when risk is shared among large numbers of policyholders.
Affinity Sales:
Selling insurance through groups such as professional and business associations.
Aftermarket Parts:
See Crash Parts; Generic Auto Parts.
Agency Companies:
Companies that market and sell products via independent agents.
Agent:
Laws of all states require all insurance agents to be licensed by the state to sell insurance. Agents may be categorized as: (1) An Exclusive Agent, who is a sales employee or sales representative of one and only one insurance company or its affiliated group of insurance companies, and seeks and services business exclusively for that company or group. (See Direct Writer.) (2) An Independent Agent, who usually represents two or more insurance companies or groups in a sales and service capacity as an independent business person.
Alien Insurance Company:
An insurance company incorporated under the laws of a foreign country.
Allied Lines:
Types of insurance associated with property insurance, which may include earthquake, sprinkler leakage, and income and extra expense coverages.
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR):
Alternative to going to court to settle disputes. Methods include arbitration, where disputing parties agree to be bound to the decision of an independent third party, and mediation, where a third party tries to arrange a settlement between the two sides.
Alternative Markets:
Mechanisms used to fund self-insurance. This includes captives, which are insurers owned by one or more non-insurers to provide owners with coverage. Risk-retention groups, formed by members of similar professions or businesses to obtain liability insurance, are also a form of self-insurance.
Annual Policy:
Insurance policy written for a term of one year or renewed one year at a time.
Annual Statement:
A report made by a company at the close of its fiscal year. It is the primary financial report required by state insurance departments to be submitted by insurers annually.
Annuitant:
The person during whose life an annuity is payable, usually the person to receive the annuity.
Annuity:
A contract that provides an income for life, a specified number of years, or a combination of the two.
Antitrust Laws:
Laws that prohibit companies from working as a group to set prices, restrict supplies or stop competition in the marketplace. The insurance industry is subject to state antitrust laws but has a limited exemption from federal antitrust laws. This exemption, set out in the McCarran-Ferguson Act, permits insurers to jointly develop common insurance forms and share loss data to help them price policies.
Application:
The statement of information that a prospective insured gives when applying for an insurance policy and that an insurance company uses to help decide if it will issue the policy and what premium rate will be charged.
Apportionment:
The dividing of a loss proportionately among two or more insurers that cover the same loss.
Appraisal:
A survey to determine a property’s insurable value, or the amount of a loss.
Appraiser:
In insurance, a specialist that evaluates the size and cost of an object, such as jewelry or art; or the extent of damage based on a claim. Often works with a claims adjuster.
Appurtenant Structures:
Buildings on the same premises as the main building insured under a property insurance policy.
Arbitration:
Procedure in which an insurance company and the insured or a vendor agree to settle a claim dispute by accepting a decision made by a third party.
Arson:
The deliberate setting of a fire.
Asset-Backed Securities:
Bonds that represent pools of loans of similar types, duration and interest rates. Almost any loan with regular repayments of principal and interest can be securitized, from auto loans and equipment leases to credit card receivables and mortgages.
Assessment:
The extra premium a mutual or reciprocal insurer’s policyholder may be required to pay in the event the insurer’s losses are greater than anticipated.
Assets:
(1) All of the property owned by a carrier. (2) The items on the balance sheet of the insurer that show the book value of property owned. Under state regulations, not all property or other resources can be admitted on the statement of the insurer. This gives rise to the term “non-admitted assets.” (Examples would be furniture, fixtures, agents’ debt balances and accounts receivable that are over 90 days old.)
Assigned Risk Plan (Automobile Insurance Plans):
A mechanism used in some states to insure people who cannot obtain insurance in the voluntary market. There is one rate level and the individual policies are assigned to specific companies according to the percentage of the market they insure.
Assurance–Insurance:
These terms are today generally accepted as synonymous, although not originally so. The term “assurance” is used more commonly in Canada and Great Britain than in the United States.
Assured:
Synonymous with “insured.” One who has an insurance policy with an insurance carrier. “Insured” is preferred.
Audit:
An examination of the books of accounts, vouchers or other records of a person, corporation, firm or other organization for the purpose of ascertaining the accuracy or inaccuracy of the record.
Automobile Death Indemnity Coverage:
Provides limited life insurance protection to insured persons specifically named in the policy in the event of a death that is a direct result of a vehicle accident. Payment is not contingent upon the establishment of negligence, but death by an intentional act of the insured is not covered.
Automobile Disability Income Coverage:
Provides persons specifically named in the policy with the weekly benefit shown in the policy in the event of continuous total disability as a direct result of bodily injury, sickness, or infection caused by an auto accident.
Automobile Insurance (Coverages):
For definitions of specific types available, see following auto insurance coverages listed alphabetically throughout the Glossary—Automobile Death Indemnity Coverage, Automobile Disability Income Coverage, Automobile Liability Insurance, Automobile Physical Damage Insurance, Bodily Injury Liability Insurance, Collision Insurance, Comprehensive Automobile Insurance, Deductible Collision and Deductible Comprehensive Coverages, Medical Payments Automobile Insurance, Personal Injury Protection Automobile Insurance (PIP), Property Damage Liability Insurance, Towing Coverage, Underinsured Motorists Coverage, Uninsured Motorists Coverage and Uninsured Motorists Property Damage Coverage.
Auto Insurance Premium:
The price an insurance company charges for coverage, based on the frequency and cost of potential accidents, theft and other losses. Prices vary from company to company, as with any product or service. Premiums also vary depending on the amount and type of coverage purchased; the make and model of the car; and the insured’s driving record, years of driving and the number of miles the car is driven per year. Other factors taken into account include the driver’s age and gender, where the car is most likely to be driven and the times of day–rush hour in an urban neighborhood or leisure-time driving in rural areas, for example. Some insurance companies may also use credit history-related information. (See Insurance Score.)
Automobile Liability Insurance:
Protection for the insured against loss arising out of legal liability when his or her car injures others or damages their property. (Includes Bodily Injury Liability and Property Damage Liability Coverages.)
Automobile Physical Damage Insurance:
The Collision and Comprehensive coverages in the automobile insurance policy.
Aviation Insurance:
Coverage against aviation perils, primarily involving operation of aircraft and characterized by a constant exposure to potential catastrophe loss. Types of coverages include insurance for damage to the aircraft or contents, aircraft owner’s liability insurance on passenger bodily injury or death, Airport Liability, Hangarkeeper’s Liability, and Aviation Products Liability insurance.
Bailee:
One who has temporary possession of property belonging to another.
Balance Sheet:
Provides a snapshot of a company’s financial condition at one point in time. It shows assets, including investments and reinsurance, and liabilities, such as loss reserves to pay claims in the future, as of a certain date. It also states a company’s equity, known as policyholder surplus. Changes in that surplus are one indicator of an insurer’s financial standing.
Basic Form:
A package insurance policy providing coverage against a limited number of specified perils.
Beach and Windstorm Plans:
State-sponsored insurance pools that sell property coverage for the peril of windstorm to people unable to buy it in the voluntary market because of their high exposure to risk. Seven states (AL, FL, LA, MS, NC, SC, TX) offer these plans to cover residential and commercial properties against hurricanes and other windstorms. Georgia and New York provide this kind of coverage for windstorm and hail in certain coastal communities through other property pools. Insurance companies that sell property insurance in the state are required to participate in these plans. Insurers share in profits and losses. (See Fair Access to Insurance Requirements Plan–FAIR Plan; Residual Market.)
Beneficiary:
Any person, institution, trust, etc., named in a life policy to receive the policy benefits upon the death of the insured.
Binder:
A written or oral contract issued temporarily to place insurance in force immediately prior to issuance of a new policy or endorsement of an existing one. A binder is subject to payment of the premium and provides coverage under the terms of the policy to be issued, unless otherwise specified.
Blanket Coverage:
A blanket form is one under which property is insured under a single amount applying to several different pieces of property rather than a specific amount of insurance on each property.
Block Policy:
An inland marine policy covering all property on or off a merchant’s premises, including property of others in the care, custody or control of the policyholder.
Bodily Injury Liability Insurance:
This coverage protects an insured against legal liability for injury to another person arising from an accident.
Boiler and Machinery Insurance:
A form of property coverage for loss arising out of the operation of pressure, mechanical and electrical equipment. It may cover loss to the boiler and machinery itself and business interruption losses.
Bond:
A security that obligates the issuer to pay interest at specified intervals and to repay the principal amount of the loan at maturity. In insurance, a form of suretyship. Bonds of various types guarantee a payment or a reimbursement for financial losses resulting from dishonesty, failure to perform and other acts.
Bond Rating:
An evaluation of a bond’s financial strength, conducted by such major ratings agencies as Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service.
Book of Business:
Total amount of insurance on an insurer’s books at a particular point in time.
Broad Form:
A package policy providing coverage for the same perils covered in the basic form, plus specified additional perils.
Broker:
A representative of the buyer of property and liability insurance who deals with either agents or companies in arranging for the coverage required by the customer. A broker is paid a commission by the company or its agent.
Burglary:
The loss of property due to theft when there is visible evidence of forcible entry to the exterior of the building.
Burglary and Theft Insurance:
Insurance for the loss of property due to burglary, robbery or larceny. It is provided in a standard homeowners policy and in a business multiple peril policy.
Business Income Insurance (Business Interruption Insurance):
Commercial coverage that reimburses a business owner for lost profits and continuing fixed expenses during the time that a business must stay closed while the premises are being restored because of physical damage from a covered peril, such as a fire. Business interruption insurance also may cover financial losses that may occur if civil authorities limit access to an area after a disaster and their actions prevent customers from reaching the business premises. Depending on the policy, civil authorities coverage may start after a waiting period and last for two or more weeks.
Businessowners Policy (BOP):
A policy that combines property, liability and business interruption coverages for small- to medium-sized businesses. Coverage is generally cheaper than if purchased through separate insurance policies.
Business Interruption Insurance:
See Business Income Insurance.
Buy-Out Policy:
A professional liability policy covering future claims resulting from incidents which occurred during the period that an expired claims-made policy was in force.
Cancellable Policy:
A policy which may be cancelled by the company at any time by giving advance notice in compliance with state requirements to the insured citing the reasons such insurance is being cancelled and refunding any unearned premium. (Term is not usually applicable to life or health insurance.)
Cancellation:
The discontinuance of an insurance policy before its normal expiration date.
Capacity:
The supply of insurance available to meet demand. Capacity depends on the industry’s financial ability to accept risk. For an individual insurer, the maximum amount of risk it can underwrite based on its financial condition. The adequacy of an insurer’s capital relative to its exposure to loss is an important measure of solvency.
A property/casualty insurer must maintain a certain level of capital and policyholder surplus to underwrite risks. This capital is known as capacity. When the industry is hit by high losses, such as after the World Trade Center terrorist attack, capacity is diminished. It can be restored by increases in net income, favorable investment returns, reinsuring more risk and or raising additional capital. When there is excess capacity, usually because of a high return on investments, premiums tend to decline as insurers compete for market share. As premiums decline, underwriting losses are likely to grow, reducing capacity and causing insurers to raise rates and tighten conditions and limits in an effort to increase profitability. Policyholder surplus is sometimes used as a measure of capacity.
Capital:
Shareholder’s equity (for publicly-traded insurance companies) and retained earnings (for mutual insurance companies). There is no general measure of capital adequacy for property/casualty insurers. Capital adequacy is linked to the riskiness of an insurer’s business. (See Risk-Based Capital; Surplus; Solvency.)
Capital Markets:
The markets in which equities and debt are traded. (See Securitization of Insurance Risk.)
Capital Stock Insurance Company:
An insurance company which is owned and controlled by stockholders or investors.
Captive Agent:
A person who represents only one insurance company and is restricted by agreement from submitting business to any other company, unless it is first rejected by the agent’s captive company. (See Exclusive Agent.)
Captive Insurer:
Insurers that are created and wholly-owned by one or more non-insurers, to provide owners with coverage. A form of self-insurance.
Cargo Insurance:
A broad classification of marine insurance providing coverage on cargo, as opposed to hulls, to protect shippers by sea from loss or damage to goods for which they would be unlikely to collect from the carriers themselves. Whether cargoes are insured for a particular voyage or under open policies which are in the nature of reporting-form policies depends upon the volume and regularity with which a shipper uses ocean transit. Cargo insurance also can cover goods transported by train or truck.
Carrier:
The insurance company or the one who agrees to pay the losses. The carrier may be organized as a stock or mutual company, a reciprocal exchange, as an association of underwriters or as a state fund.
Car Year:
Equal to 365 days of insured coverage for a single vehicle. It is the standard measurement for automobile insurance.
Cash Value:
The cash fund which a life policy develops usually after the first or second year the policy has been in force. It is available when the policy is surrendered or may be borrowed earlier as a policy loan.
Casualty Insurance:
Insurance primarily concerned with the legal liability for losses caused by injury to persons or damage to property of others. Also includes, among other coverages: automobile, Workers’ Compensation, employers’ liability, general liability, plate glass, theft and personal liability. It excludes life, fire and marine insurance.
Catastrophe:
Term used for statistical recording purposes to refer to a single incident or a series of closely related incidents causing severe insured property losses totaling more than a given amount, currently $25 million.
Catastrophe Bonds:
Risk-based securities that pay high interest rates and provide insurance companies with a form of reinsurance to pay losses from a catastrophe such as those caused by a major hurricane. They allow insurance risk to be sold to institutional investors in the form of bonds, thus spreading the risk. (See Securitization of Insurance Risk.)
Catastrophe Deductible:
A percentage or dollar amount that a homeowner must pay before the insurance policy kicks in when a major natural disaster occurs. These large deductibles limit an insurer’s potential losses in such cases, allowing it to insure more property. A property insurer may not be able to buy reinsurance to protect its own bottom line unless it keeps its potential maximum losses under a certain level.
Catastrophe Factor:
Probability of catastrophic loss, based on the total number of catastrophes in a state over a 40-year period.
Catastrophe Model:
Using computers, a method to mesh long-term disaster information with current demographic, building and other data to determine the potential cost of natural disasters and other catastrophic losses for a given geographic area.
Catastrophe Reinsurance:
Reinsurance (insurance for insurers) for catastrophic losses. The insurance industry is able to absorb the multibillion dollar losses caused by natural and man-made disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes and terrorist attacks because losses are spread among thousands of companies including catastrophe reinsurers who operate on a global basis. Insurers’ ability and willingness to sell insurance fluctuates with the availability and cost of catastrophe reinsurance.
After major disasters, such as Hurricane Andrew and the World Trade Center terrorist attack, the availability of catastrophe reinsurance becomes extremely limited. Claims deplete reinsurers’ capital and, as a result, companies are more selective in the type and amount of risks they assume. In addition, with available supply limited, prices for reinsurance rise. This contributes to an overall increase in prices for property insurance.
Cede:
To transfer all or part of a risk written by an insurer (the ceding, or primary company) to a reinsurer.
Cell Phone Insurance:
Separate insurance provided to cover cell phones for damage or theft. Policies are often sold with the cell phones themselves.
Cession:
The unit of insurance passed to the reinsurer by the ceding company. The unit (cession) may accordingly be the whole or a portion of (a) single risks, (b) defined type or class of policies or (c) defined divisions of a policy as agreed.
Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU):
A designation conferred in recognition of the attainment of certain standards of education and proficiency in the uses of life insurance to satisfy the financial needs of the insured in light of current tax and other laws. A Chartered Life Underwriter is normally an agent or someone responsible for sales or marketing activities.
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriter (CPCU):
A designation conferred in recognition of the attainment of certain standards of education and proficiency in the art and science of property and casualty insurance underwriting.
Claim:
A request for payment for a loss which may come under the terms of an insurance contract. There are two types of claims. A first-party claim is one made by the policyholder for reimbursement by his or her company. A third-party claim is one by a person against a policyholder of another company and the payment, if any, will be made by that company.
Claim Frequency:
The number of claims occurring under a given coverage divided by the number of earned exposures for the given coverage. It is usually expressed as the number of claims paid per 100 of such exposures. Example: For auto bodily injury (BI), the frequency of 2.50% means that bodily injury accidents were incurred at the rate of 2-1/2 for every 100 cars insured for BI for one year.
Claim Severity:
The average cost per claim.
Claims-Made Form:
A type of liability policy which covers claims which occur and are reported while the policy is in effect.
Classification:
The combining of policyholders or properties into groups with the same general characteristics so that the various groups’ inherent differences in exposure to loss can be recognized for rating or underwriting purposes.
Coinsurance (Health Insurance):
A provision in a medical-expense insurance policy which requires that the insured person pay part of the expense and the insurance company will pay the remaining part. (Also see Coinsurance [Property Insurance].)
Coinsurance (Property Insurance):
A provision in a property insurance policy which requires the insured to carry insurance equal to a certain specified percentage of the value of the property for the insured to receive full payment on a loss up to the amount of the policy. Otherwise, payment would be only a percentage of the actual loss, that percentage determined by the amount of insurance carried relative to the amount that is required to be carried by the policy for full protection up to policy limits. (Also see Coinsurance [Health Insurance].)
Collateral:
Property that is offered to secure a loan or other credit and that becomes subject to seizure on default. (Also called security.)
Collateral Source Rule:
Bars the introduction of information that indicates a person has been compensated or reimbursed by a source other than the defendant in civil actions related to negligence or other liability.
Collision Insurance:
Protection against loss resulting from any damage to the policyholder’s car caused by collision with another vehicle or object, or by upset of the insured car, whether it was the insured’s fault or not (other than his/her own willful act). This does not cover other people’s property. (See Deductible Collision.)
Combined Ratio:
The sum of the ratio of losses incurred to premiums earned and the ratio of commissions and expenses incurred to premiums written.
Combined Single Limit:
A liability coverage limit that combines both bodily injury and property damage into one aggregate amount.
Commercial Blanket Bond:
A fidelity bond for operators of commercial establishments, etc. (See Fidelity Bond.)
Commercial Credit Insurance:
A guarantee to manufacturers, wholesalers and service organizations that they will be paid for goods shipped or services rendered. It is a guarantee of that part of their working capital that is represented by accounts receivable.
Commercial General Liability Policy:
Often referred to as the CGL, this policy provides broad protection against situations in which a business must defend itself against lawsuits or pay damages for personal injury or property damage to third parties.
Commercial Insurance (Coverages):
Definitions of many commercial coverages are listed alphabetically throughout the Glossary. Among these coverages are Aviation Insurance, Cargo Insurance, Commercial Credit Insurance, Commercial Multiple-Line Policy, Crop-Hail Insurance, Employers’ Liability Insurance, General Liability Insurance, Kidnap and Ransom Insurance, Marine Insurance, Products Liability Insurance, Professional Liability Insurance, Public Liability Insurance, Rain Insurance, Surplus Lines, Title Insurance and Workers’ Compensation.
Commercial Lines:
The various kinds of insurance which are written for businesses. (Also see Commercial Insurance [Coverages].)
Commercial Multiple-Line Policy:
Package type of policy that includes a wide range of essential property and liability coverages for businesses.
Commission:
A percentage of an insurance premium paid to an agent or broker for producing and servicing the business.
Commissioner of Insurance:
Title of the head of the state insurance department who is responsible for the enforcement of insurance laws and for promulgating regulations dealing with the insurance industry.
Comparative Negligence:
Under this concept a plaintiff (the person bringing suit) may recover damages even though guilty of some negligence. His or her recovery, however, is reduced by the amount or percent of that negligence. There are various forms of comparative negligence, such as: “Pure Comparative,” in which the plaintiff recovers so long as he or she is not solely at fault; “Less Than,” in which the plaintiff recovers so long as his or her negligence is less than that of the defendant; and “Not Greater Than,” in which the plaintiff recovers so long as his or her negligence is not greater than the defendant’s.
Competitive Replacement Parts:
See Crash Parts; Generic Auto Parts.
Competitive State Fund:
A facility established by a state to sell workers compensation in competition with private insurers.
Complaint Ratio:
A measure used by some state insurance departments to track consumer complaints against insurance companies. Generally, it is written as the number of complaints upheld against an insurance company, as a percentage of premiums written. In some states, complaints from medical providers over the promptness of payments may also be included.
Completed Operations Coverage:
Pays for bodily injury or property damage caused by a completed project or job. Protects a business that sells a service against liability claims.
Comprehensive Automobile Insurance:
Protection against loss resulting from damage to the insured auto, commonly referred to as ”other than collision” coverage. Broad coverage is provided and includes protection from such hazards as fire, theft, glass damage, wind, hail and malicious mischief. This is a first-party coverage.
Comprehensive Personal Liability Insurance:
Protection for an insured against loss arising out of his or her legal liability to pay money for damage or injury he or she has caused to others. This does not include automobile liability, but includes almost every activity of the insured except “personal injury” and his or her business operations. (See “Personal Injury” Liability Insurance.)
Compulsory Auto Liability Insurance:
Insurance laws in some states require motorists to carry at least certain minimum auto liability coverages for bodily injury and property damage.
Concealment:
Normally means the willful withholding of material fact which could affect an insurer’s issuance of a policy or processing of a claim.
Conditions:
Provisions of an insurance policy which state the rights and duties of the insured and insurer.
Condominium Insurance:
A policy designed for the special needs of condominium unit owner-occupants to cover personal property and liability, to complement the insurance normally purchased by the condominium association for the building, structures and liability. Additional coverages are offered unit owners by many insurers.
Consequential Loss:
A loss resulting from, but not caused directly by, another insured loss. A “consequential loss” (spoilage of meat stored in a refrigerated building, for example) usually arises out of a change in temperature resulting from damage to the building (but not directly to the meat) by a covered peril such as fire. “Consequential Loss” coverages are available to protect the insured against this specific indirect loss.
Contingent Liability Insurance:
Covers the insured individual or business in cases of indirect or “contingent” liability, where direct liability for an accident, for example, falls on another, but because of the relationship between the insured and the other party, the insured might still be held indirectly liable. (Example: A business being responsible for the work performed by an independent contractor.)
Contract:
The “Law of Contracts” specifies four requirements for the formation of a single contract: (1) parties of legal capacity; (2) expression of mutual consent of the parties to a promise, or set of promises; (3) a valid consideration; and (4) the absence of any statute or other rule declaring such agreement void. An insurance policy qualifies as a contract under the above definition.
Contract Bond:
A bond which guarantees faithful performance of a construction contract and payment of all material and labor bills related to that contract. A Performance Bond covers faithful performance only; a Payment Bond guarantees payment of material and labor expenses.
Contractual Liability Insurance:
Provides coverage for claims arising out of liability that has been assumed by the insured under a written or oral contract.
Contributory Negligence:
Carelessness of the injured person that helped cause the accident in which he or she was injured. Some states bar recovery to the plaintiff if the plaintiff was contributorily negligent.
Coverage:
The scope of the protection provided under a contract of insurance; any of several risks covered by a policy.
Covered/Insured Peril:
The perils of loss you are protected against by an insurance policy. Examples of perils include fire, lightning, theft, vandalism and the threat of a lawsuit.
Crash Parts:
Sheet metal parts that are most often damaged in a car crash. (See Generic Auto Parts.)
Credit:
The promise to pay in the future in order to buy or borrow in the present. The right to defer payment of debt.
Credit Derivatives:
A contract that enables a user, such as a bank, to better manage its credit risk. A way of transferring credit risk to another party.
Credit Disability Insurance:
Disability insurance on the borrower, payable to the creditor while the borrower is disabled, to cover the loan payment (usually small loans repayable in installments). This insurance is usually issued through the creditor (a lender or lending agency) and is provided by an insurance company under a group credit disability policy. Credit disability insurance also can be purchased by an individual directly from an insurance company. (Also see Credit Life Insurance.)
Credit Enhancement:
A technique to lower the interest payments on a bond by raising the issue’s credit rating, often through insurance in the form of a financial guarantee or with standby letters of credit issued by a bank.
Credit Insurance (Commercial):
See Commercial Credit Insurance.
Credit Life Insurance:
Term life insurance on the life of a borrower, payable to the creditor, to repay a loan (usually small loans repayable in installments) in case of death. This insurance is usually issued through the creditor (a lender or lending agency) and is provided by a life insurance company under a group credit life insurance policy to insure the lives of those who borrow from the creditor. Credit life insurance also can be purchased by an individual directly from a life insurance company. (Also see Credit Disability Insurance.)
Credit Rating:
See Bond Rating.
Credit Score:
The number produced by an analysis of an individual’s credit history. The use of credit information affects all consumers in many ways, from getting a job, finding a place to live, securing a loan, getting a telephone, and buying insurance. Credit history is routinely reviewed by insurers before issuing a commercial policy because businesses in poor financial condition tend to cut back on safety which can lead to more accidents and more claims. Auto and home insurers may use information in a credit history to produce an insurance score. Insurance scores may be used in underwriting and rating insurance policies. (See Insurance Score.)
Crime Insurance:
Term referring to property coverages for the perils of burglary, theft and robbery.
Crop-Hail Insurance:
Protection against hail damage to growing crops. Coverage is often afforded under such policies for crop damage due to fire, windstorm, drought, frost, snow, etc.
Customer Service Representative:
The assistant that supports the sales efforts of the sales agent or producer. Other titles include administrative assistant, agency underwriter and marketing specialist. CSR is also a designation for a certified customer service representative.
Declarations:
That part of the policy describing the named insured, address, effective date, term of the policy, applicable coverages, the amount of insurance and the premium.
Decreasing Term Life Insurance:
Term insurance, the face value of which decreases each year over a stated period. Family income and mortgage cancellation are common types of decreasing term insurance.
Deductible:
A provision in an insurance contract stating that the insurer will pay that amount of any insured loss that is in excess of a specified amount. The specified amount is the deductible.
Deductible Collision and Deductible Comprehensive Coverages:
Forms of collision or comprehensive auto insurance coverages which specify that an insurance company will pay the damage less a specified amount under the particular coverage. For example: For $100 Deductible Collision Coverage, the company would deduct $100 from the total damage under the collision coverage and be liable for the amount in excess of $100. Rates are reduced as the amount of the deductible is increased.
Demutualization:
The conversion of insurance companies from mutual companies owned by their policyholders into publicly-traded stock companies.
Depreciation:
A decrease in the value of property due to age, wear and tear.
Deregulation:
In insurance, reducing regulatory control over insurance rates and forms. Commercial insurance for businesses of a certain size has been deregulated in many states.
Diminution of Value:
The idea that a vehicle loses value after it has been damaged in an accident and repaired.
Directors and Officers Liability
Insurance (D&O):
Coverage for directors and officers of firms or organizations against liability claims arising out of alleged errors in judgment, breaches of duty, and wrongful acts related to their organizational activities.
Direct Premiums Written:
Property/casualty premiums collected by the insurer from policyholders, before reinsurance premiums are deducted. Insurers share some direct premiums and the risk involved with their reinsurers.
Direct Sales/Direct Response:
Method of selling insurance directly to the insured through an insurance company’s own employees, through the mail, or via the Internet. This is in lieu of using captive or exclusive agents.
Direct Writer:
An insurer whose distribution mechanism is either the direct selling system or the exclusive agent system. (See Agent.)
Disability Threshold:
In no-fault insurance states with the disability threshold, it provides that a victim may not sue in tort unless he/she has been disabled (defined differently in various state plans) from an accident for a specific period of time.
Dividends:
(1) Policyholder Dividend—The return of part of the premium paid for a policy issued on a participating basis by an insurer. Any such dividend is dependent upon premiums collected in excess of losses and expenses for the particular class of business at the end of the policy period. (2) Stockholder Dividend—A portion of the surplus paid to the stockholders of a corporation.
Dollar Threshold:
In no-fault auto insurance states with the dollar threshold, it prevents individuals from suing in tort to recover for pain and suffering unless their medical expenses exceed a certain dollar amount.
Domestic Insurance Company:
An insurance company organized or domiciled in a given state is referred to in that state as a domestic carrier.
Double Indemnity:
See Accidental Death Benefit (Life Insurance).
Early Warning System:
A system of measuring insurers’ financial stability set up by insurance industry regulators. An example is the Insurance Regulatory Information System (IRIS), which uses financial ratios to identify insurers in need of regulatory attention.
Earned Premium:
The part of the total property/casualty policy premium earned by the insurance company which applies to the expired portion of the policy period.
Earthquake Insurance:
Covers a building and its contents, but includes a large percentage deductible on each. A special policy or endorsement exists because earthquakes are not covered by standard homeowners or most business policies.
Economic Loss:
Total financial loss resulting from the death or disability of a wage earner, or from the destruction of property. Includes the loss of earnings, medical expenses, funeral expenses, the cost of restoring or replacing property, and legal expenses. It does not include non economic losses, such as pain caused by an injury.
Electronic Commerce (E-Commerce):
The sale of products such as insurance over the Internet.
Elimination Period:
A kind of deductible or waiting period usually found in disability policies. It is counted in days from the beginning of the illness or injury.
Employee Dishonesty Coverage:
Covers direct losses and damage to businesses resulting from the dishonest acts of employees. (See Fidelity Bond.)
Employers’ Liability Insurance:
Provides protection for the employer for those injuries arising out of and in the course of employment which were not covered under the workers’ compensation law.
Endorsement:
An additional piece of paper, not a part of the original contract, which cites certain terms and which becomes a legal part of that insurance contract. Additions to life insurance contracts are accomplished through the use of riders, which are similar to endorsements.
Environmental Impairment Insurance:
A form of insurance designed to cover losses and liabilities arising from damages to property by pollution.
Equipment Breakdown Insurance:
See Boiler and Machinery Insurance.
Equity:
In investments, the ownership interest of shareholders. In a corporation, stocks as opposed to bonds.
Errors and Omissions Insurance (E&O):
A type of professional liability insurance which indemnifies insured professionals—who include, but are not limited to, lawyers, insurance agents and brokers, accountants, real estate agents, appraisers, abstracters, title insurance agents, architects and engineers, advertising agents, adjusters, directors and trustees, fiduciaries, travel agents and data processing firms—for losses sustained because of their errors or oversights.
Escrow Account:
Funds that a lender collects to pay monthly premiums in mortgage and homeowners insurance, and sometimes to pay property taxes.
Excess and Surplus Lines:
Property/casualty coverage that isn’t available from insurers licensed by the state (called admitted insurers) and must be purchased from a non-admitted carrier.
Excess of Loss Reinsurance:
A contract between an insurer and a reinsurer, whereby the insurer agrees to pay a specified portion of a claim and the reinsurer to pay all or a part of the claim above that amount.
Excess Limits:
Coverage against losses in excess of a specified dollar limit.
Exclusion:
A provision in an insurance policy that eliminates coverage for certain risks, people, property classes, or locations.
Exclusive Agent:
A captive agent, or a person who represents only one insurance company and is restricted by agreement from submitting business to any other company unless it is first rejected by the agent’s company. (See Captive Agent.)
Exclusive Remedy:
Part of the social contract that forms the basis for workers compensation statutes under which employers are responsible for work-related injury and disease, regardless of whether is was the employee’s fault and in return the injured employee gives up the right to sue when the employer’s negligence causes the harm.
Expense Ratio:
The ratio of a company’s operating expenses to premiums written. (Expenses include losses and loss adjustment expenses.)
Experience:
The loss record of an insured or of a particular class of coverage.
Expiration Date:
The date shown on the declarations page of the policy when coverage will stop. It may be a specific date or a statement that coverage is continuous until cancelled.
Exposure:
This term in the insurance field may have several meanings: (1) possibility of loss; (2) a loss potential as measured by type of construction, area or values; (3) a possibility of a loss being communicated to an insurance risk from its surroundings; or (4) a unit of measure of the amount of risk a company assumes (for example, one car insured for one year).
Extended Coverage:
An endorsement added to an insurance policy, or clause within a policy, that provides additional coverage for risks other than those in a basic policy.
Extended Coverage Property Insurance:
An extension of the fire insurance policy to protect the insured against property damage caused by the additional perils of windstorm, hail, explosion, or riot, civil commotion, aircraft, vehicle and smoke.
Extended Replacement Cost Coverage:
Pays a certain amount above the policy limit to replace a damaged home, generally 120% or 125%. Similar to a guaranteed replacement cost policy, which has no percentage limits. Most homeowner policy limits track inflation in building costs. Guaranteed and extended replacement cost policies are designed to protect the policyholder after a major disaster when the high demand for building contractors and materials can push up the normal cost of reconstruction. (See Replacement Cost Coverage.)
Face Amount:
See Protection Amount.
Facultative Reinsurance:
Reinsurance on an individual policy basis wherein each risk which an insurance company wishes to reinsure is reviewed by the reinsurer, which has the “faculty” or option to accept or decline all or part of each risk offered to it.
FAIR (Fair Access to Insurance Requirements) Plan:
A facility, operating under a government-insurance industry cooperative program, to make fire insurance and other forms of property insurance readily available to persons who have difficulty obtaining such coverage.
Family Auto Insurance:
The automobile policy (most common in the industry) which provides protection for the insured and resident relatives in the same household.
Family Plan Insurance:
This is insurance in which the head of the household has one master policy on his/her life (usually whole life) and term coverage for wife/husband and children in lesser amounts.
Farm-Ranchowners Insurance:
Package policy that protects the policyholder against named perils and liabilities and usually covers homes and their contents, along with barns, stables, and other structures.
Federal Crime Insurance:
Insurance against burglary, larceny and robbery losses offered by the federal government where the Federal Insurance Administration has determined that such insurance is not otherwise readily available.
Federal Insurance Administration:
Federal agency in charge of administering the National Flood Insurance Program. It does not regulate the insurance industry.
Federal Reserve Board:
Seven-member board that supervises the banking system by issuing regulations controlling bank holding companies and federal laws over the banking industry. It also controls and oversees the U.S. monetary system and credit supply.
Fee For Service (FFS):
Formerly a standard health insurance policy. Now a form of health insurance that allows the insured to go to any doctor, hospital or other provider which would bill for each service given, and the insurer and the patient share in the cost of the services provided.
Fidelity Bond:
A form of protection that covers policyholders for losses that they incur as a result of fraudulent acts by specified individuals. It usually insures a business for losses caused by the dishonest acts of its employees.
Fiduciary Bond:
A type of surety bond, sometimes called a probate bond, which is required of certain fiduciaries, such as executors and trustees, that guarantees the performance of their responsibilities.
Fiduciary Liability:
Legal responsibility of a fiduciary to safeguard assets of beneficiaries. A fiduciary, for example a pension fund manager, is required to manage investments held in trust in the best interest of beneficiaries. Fiduciary liability insurance covers breaches of fiduciary duty such as misstatements or misleading statements, errors and omissions.
File-and-Use States:
States where insurers must file rate changes with their regulators, but don’t have to wait for approval to put them into effect.
Financial Guarantee Insurance:
Covers losses from specific financial transactions and guarantees that investors in debt instruments, such as municipal bonds, receive timely payment of principal and interest if there is a default. Raises the credit rating of debt to which the guarantee is attached. Investment bankers who sell asset-backed securities, securities backed by loan portfolios, use this insurance to enhance marketability. (See Municipal Bond Insurance.)
Financial Responsibility Law:
A state law which may require motorists to furnish evidence, either before or after involvement in an auto accident (depending on the individual state’s law), of ability to pay for damages up to certain minimum dollar limits. These requirements commonly are met by carrying auto liability insurance with specified minimum limits or more.
Finite Risk Reinsurance:
Contract under which the ultimate liability of the reinsurer is capped and on which anticipated investment income is expressly acknowledged as an underwriting component. Also known as Financial Reinsurance because this type of coverage is often bought to improve the balance sheet effects of statutory accounting principles.
Fire Insurance:
Coverage protecting property against losses caused by a fire or lightning that is usually included in homeowners or commercial multiple peril policies.
First-Party Coverage:
Coverage for the policyholder’s own property or person. In no-fault auto insurance it pays for the cost of injuries. In no-fault states with the broadest coverage, the personal injury protection (PIP) part of the policy pays for medical care, lost income, funeral expenses and, where the injured person is not able to provide services such as child care, for substitute services. (See No-Fault; Third-Party Coverage.)
Fleet Policy:
An auto policy covering a number of vehicles owned by a single insured.
Floater:
A form of insurance that applies to movable property, whatever its location, within the territorial limits imposed by the contract. The coverage “floats” with the property.
Flood Insurance:
Coverage against loss resulting from the flood peril, widely available under a program developed in 1968 by the private insurance industry and the federal government.
Forced Place Insurance:
Insurance purchased by a bank or creditor on an uninsured debtor’s behalf so if the property is damaged, funding is available to repair it.
Foreign Insurance Company:
In a given state, an insurer domiciled in another state.
Fraternal Benefit Society:
An organization that exists to provide social and insurance benefits to its members. In such a society, members often share a common religious, ethnic or vocational background, although some fraternals are open to the general public.
Fraud:
Intentional concealment or misrepresentation with the objective of forcing an insurer to provide a benefit (such as paying a claim) which otherwise would not be provided.
Frequency:
Number of times a loss occurs. One of the criteria used in calculating premium rates.
Fronting:
A procedure in which a primary insurer acts as the insurer of record by issuing a policy, but then passes the entire risk to a reinsurer in exchange for a commission. Often, the fronting insurer is licensed to do business in a state or country where the risk is located, but the reinsurer is not. The reinsurer in this scenario is often a captive or an independent insurance company that cannot sell insurance directly in a particular country.
Funded Reserve:
Bookkeeping account of sums set aside periodically by a business for the purpose of paying for losses as they occur. Usually, the sums are invested conservatively.
Gap Insurance:
An automobile insurance option, available in some states, that covers the difference between a car’s actual cash value when it is stolen or wrecked and the amount the consumer owes the leasing or finance company. Mainly used for leased cars. (See Actual Cash Value.)
General Average:
In ocean marine insurance, a concept which provides that, where a portion of a vessel or cargo is jettisoned to save the entire venture from peril at sea, the resulting loss is shared by all parties involved. The owners of property that is saved contribute in proportion to the interests suffering loss, provided the latter are free of fault in the danger and the venture ultimately is successful. (Distinct from Particular Average.)
General Damages:
In auto insurance, typically refers to awards for pain and suffering.
General Liability Insurance:
A broad term meaning liability insurance, other than automobile liability or employers’ liability, written to cover professional and commercial risks. In respect to commercial liability, various available coverages could cover such risks as premises and operations, contractual liability, products and completed operations.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP):
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) accounting is used in financial statements that publicly-held companies prepare for the Securities and Exchange Commission. (See Statutory Accounting Principles–SAP.)
Generic Auto Parts:
Auto crash parts produced by firms that are not associated with car manufacturers. Insurers consider these parts, when certified, at least as good as those that come from the original equipment manufacturer (OEM). They are often cheaper than the identical part produced by the OEM. (See Crash Parts; Aftermarket Parts; Competitive Replacement Parts; Original Equipment Manufacturer Parts–OEM.)
Glass Insurance:
Coverage for glass breakage caused by all risks; fire and war are sometimes excluded. Insurance can be bought for windows, structural glass, leaded glass, and mirrors. Available with or without a deductible.
Good Driver Plan:
An auto insurance rating program that reflects the insured’s accident and traffic violation record as a factor in determining the premium.
Grace Period:
The number of days (31 in most cases) a life insurance policy will remain in force when a payment is overdue.
Graduated Drivers License:
Licenses for younger drivers that allow them to improve their skills. Regulations vary by state, but often restrict night time driving. Young drivers receive a learner’s permit, followed by a provisional license, before they can receive a standard drivers license.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act:
Financial services legislation, passed by Congress in 1999, that removed Depression-era prohibitions against the combination of commercial banking and investment-banking activities. It allows insurance companies, banks, and securities firms to engage in each others’ activities and own one another.
Group Insurance:
A single policy covering a group of individuals, usually employees of the same company or members of the same association and their dependents. Coverage occurs under a master policy issued to the employer or association.
Guarantee Period:
Period during which the level of interest specified under a fixed annuity is guaranteed.
Guaranteed Cost Insurance:
The life insurance sold by some companies, with all cost factors guaranteed at the time of issue. Policies of this type usually have lower premiums than the pre-divided premiums of comparable participating policies.
Guaranty Fund:
A fund, derived from assessment against solvent insurance companies, to absorb losses of claimants against insolvent insurers.
Gun Liability:
A new legal concept that holds gun manufacturers liable for the cost of injuries caused by guns. Several cities have filed lawsuits based on this concept.
Hacker Insurance:
A coverage that protects businesses engaged in electronic commerce from losses caused by hackers.
Hail Insurance:
See Crop-Hail Insurance.
Hard Market:
A seller’s market in which insurance is expensive and in short supply. (See Property/Casualty Insurance Cycle.)
Hazard:
The presence of a condition that could cause loss or injury to property or persons. For example, smoking in bed increases the chance for loss of property and life resulting from fire.
Health Insurance:
There are two major types: Disability income insurance pays for loss of income due to disability; medical expense insurance pays for hospital, doctor and other medical expenses. Both of these generally pay for losses arising from sickness or accidents. Some policies, referred to as “accident policies,” do not cover sickness.
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO):
The oldest form of managed health care. In exchange for a monthly fee, HMOs offer members a comprehensive range of health services, usually including preventive medical care.
Hold Harmless Agreement:
A contract under which one party’s legal liability for damages is assumed by the other party to the contract.
Homeowners Policy:
A package policy for the homeowner that combines “named peril” (including theft coverage) protection on contents, coverage on the dwelling ranging from “named peril” to physical loss, additional living expense protection and personal liability insurance.
House Year:
Equal to 365 days of insured coverage for a single dwelling. It is the standard measurement for homeowners insurance.
Hull Policy:
An ocean marine or aviation insurance contract covering damage to or loss of a ship or plane, but not the contents.
Hurricane:
A tropical storm with sustained winds of 75 or more miles an hour that is usually accompanied by rain and abnormally high tides.
Hurricane Deductible:
A percentage or dollar amount added to a homeowners insurance policy to limit an insurer’s exposure to loss from a hurricane. Higher deductibles are instituted in higher risk areas, such as coastal regions. Specific details, such as the intensity of the storm for the deductible to be triggered and the extent of the high risk area, vary from insurer to insurer and state to state.
Indemnify:
Provide financial compensation for losses.
Indemnity:
In general, means reimbursement for loss, but also is used to mean a benefit provided by a policy. In health insurance it sometimes is used to designate an amount paid regardless of actual loss or expense incurred.
Identity Theft Coverage:
Coverage for expenses incurred as the result of an identity theft. Can include costs for notarizing fraud affidavits and certified mail, lost income from time taken off from work to meet with law-enforcement personnel or credit agencies, fees for reapplying for loans and attorney’s fees to defend against lawsuits and remove criminal or civil judgments.
Incurred But Not Reported Losses (IBNR):
Losses that are not filed with the insurer or reinsurer until years after the policy is sold. Some liability claims may be filed long after the event that caused the injury to occur. Asbestos-related diseases, for example, do not show up until decades after the exposure. IBNR also refers to estimates made about claims already reported but where the full extent of the injury is not yet known, such as a workers compensation claim where the degree to which work-related injuries prevents a worker from earning what he or she earned before the injury unfolds over time. Insurance companies regularly adjust reserves for such losses as new information becomes available.
Incurred Losses:
Losses occurring within a fixed period, whether or not adjusted or paid during the same period.
Independent Agent:
Agent who is self-employed, is paid on commission, and represents several insurance companies. (See Captive Agent.)
Inflation Guard Clause:
A provision added to a homeowners insurance policy that automatically adjusts the coverage limit on the dwelling each time the policy is renewed to reflect current construction costs.
Inland Marine Insurance:
This broad type of coverage was developed for shipments that do not involve ocean transport. Covers articles in transit by all forms of land and air transportation as well as bridges, tunnels and other means of transportation and communication. Floaters that cover expensive personal items such as fine art and jewelry are included in this category. (See Floater.)
Insolvency:
Insurer’s inability to pay debts. Insurance insolvency standards and the regulatory actions taken vary from state to state. When regulators deem an insurance company is in danger of becoming insolvent, they can take one of three actions: place a company in conservatorship or rehabilitation if the company can be saved or liquidation if salvage is deemed impossible. The difference between the first two options is one of degree. Regulators guide companies in conservatorship but direct those in rehabilitation. Typically the first sign of problems is inability to pass the financial tests regulators administer as a routine procedure. (See Liquidation; Risk-Based Capital.)
Inspection Report:
A report filed by an investigator employed by the insurance company or a credit agency, giving general information on the health and finances of the applicant and the physical condition of the property (if property is to be insured).
Insurable Risk:
Risks for which it is relatively easy to get insurance and that meet certain criteria. These include being definable, accidental in nature, and part of a group of similar risks large enough to make losses predictable. The insurance company also must be able to come up with a reasonable price for the insurance.
Insurance:
A system to make large financial losses more affordable by pooling the risks of many individuals and business entities and transferring them to an insurance company or other large group in return for a premium.
Insurance Pool:
A group of insurance companies that pool assets, enabling them to provide an amount of insurance substantially more than can be provided by individual companies to ensure large risks such as nuclear power stations. Pools may be formed voluntarily or mandated by the state to cover risks that can’t obtain coverage in the voluntary market such as coastal properties subject to hurricanes. (See Beach and Windstorm Plans; Fair Access to Insurance Requirements Plan–FAIR Plan; Joint Underwriting Association–JUA.)
Insurance Regulatory Information System (IRIS):
Uses financial ratios to measure insurers’ financial strength. Developed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Each individual state insurance department chooses how to use IRIS.
Insurance Score:
Insurance scores are confidential rankings based on credit information. This includes whether the consumer has made timely payments on loans, the number of open credit card accounts and whether a bankruptcy filing has been made. An insurance score is a measure of how well consumers manage their financial affairs, not of their financial assets. It does not include information about income or race. Studies have shown that people who manage their money well tend also to manage their most important asset, their home, well. And people who manage their money responsibly also tend to handle driving a car responsibly. Some insurance companies use insurance scores as an insurance underwriting and rating tool.
Insurance-to-Value:
Insurance written in an amount approximating the value of the insured property.
Insured:
A person covered by an insurance policy.
Internal Fraud:
An act of deception or strategy used to deceive or cheat an insurer by an employee, including misrepresentation or concealment.
Internet Insurer:
An insurer that sells exclusively via the Internet.
Internet Liability Insurance:
Coverage designed to protect businesses from liabilities that arise from the conducting of business over the Internet, including copyright infringement, defamation, and violation of privacy.
Investment Income:
The income generated by a company’s portfolio of investments (such as bonds, stocks or other financial ventures).
Joint Underwriting Association (JUA):
A device used to provide insurance to those who cannot obtain insurance in the voluntary market. Certain companies issue policies at one rate level and handle claims, but the ultimate costs are borne by all companies writing insurance in that state.
Junk Bonds:
Corporate bonds with credit ratings of BB or less. They pay a higher yield than investment grade bonds because issuers have a higher perceived risk of default. Such bonds involve market risk that could force investors, including insurers, to sell the bonds when their value is low. Most states place limits on insurers’ investments in these bonds. In general, because property/casualty insurers can be called upon to provide huge sums of money immediately after a disaster, their investments must be liquid. Less than 2 percent are in real estate and a similarly small percentage are in junk bonds.
Key Person Insurance:
Insurance on the life or health of a key individual whose services are essential to the continuing success of a business and whose death or disability could cause the firm a substantial financial loss.
Kidnap and Ransom Insurance:
Written for financial institutions and other corporations, this insurance covers named employees for individual or aggregate amounts paid as ransom, with deductibles requiring the insured to participate in approximately 10% of any loss.
Lapsed Policy:
A life or health insurance policy terminated as a result of non payment of a premium before the end of the grace period.
Law of Large Numbers:
The theory of probability on which the business of insurance is based. Simply put, this mathematical premise says that the larger the group of units insured, such as sport-utility vehicles, the more accurate the predictions of loss will be.
Legal Expense Insurance:
Insurance to reimburse policyholders for legal fees incurred for defense from lawsuits involving areas of civil law not covered by standard liability insurance. Examples include: discrimination, wrongful discharge, contract disputes and patent disputes.
Level Premium Life Insurance:
Insurance for which the cost is distributed evenly over the period during which premiums are paid. The premium remains the same from year to year and is more than the actual cost of protection in the earlier years of the policy and less than the actual cost in the later years. The excess paid in the early years builds up a reserve which helps meet the costs in later years.
Liabilities:
An insurance company’s liabilities consist of its immediate or contingent policy obligations and unpaid claims, as well as the usual obligations arising out of doing business such as taxes, payroll, etc.
Liability Insurance:
Provides protection for the insured against loss arising out of his/her legal liability to third parties.
Liability Limits:
The stipulated sum or sums beyond which an insurance company is not liable to protect the insured.
License—Agent or Broker:
Certification issued by a state’s department of insurance that an individual is qualified to solicit insurance applications in the state for the period covered.
License—Company:
Certification issued by a state’s department of insurance that an insurance company is qualified to do business in the state.
Limit:
The maximum amount of benefits that an insurer agrees to pay in the event of a loss.
Line:
A type or kind of insurance.
Liquidation:
Enables the state insurance department as liquidator or its appointed deputy to wind up the insurance company’s affairs by selling its assets and settling claims upon those assets. After receiving the liquidation order, the liquidator notifies insurance departments in other states and state guaranty funds of the liquidation proceedings. Such insurance company liquidations are not subject to the Federal Bankruptcy Code but to each state’s liquidation statutes.
Liquidity:
The ability and speed with which a security can be converted into cash.
Liquor Liability:
Coverage for bodily injury or property damage caused by an intoxicated person who was served liquor by the policyholder.
Litigation:
The process of a lawsuit.
Lloyd’s of London:
A marketplace where underwriting syndicates, or mini-insurers, gather to sell insurance policies and reinsurance. Each syndicate is managed by an underwriter who decides whether or not to accept the risk. The Lloyd’s market is a major player in the international reinsurance market as well as a primary market for marine insurance and large risks. Originally, Lloyd’s was a London coffee house in the 1600s patronized by shipowners who insured each other’s hulls and cargoes. As Lloyd’s developed, wealthy individuals, called “Names,” placed their personal assets behind insurance risks as a business venture. Increasingly since the 1990s, most of the capital comes from corporations.
Lloyds:
Corporation formed to market services of a group of underwriters. Does not issue insurance policies or provide insurance protection. Insurance is written by individual underwriters, with each assuming a part of every risk. Has no connection to Lloyd’s of London, and is found primarily in Texas.
Long-term Care Insurance:
Coverage that, under specified conditions, provides skilled nursing, intermediate care, or custodial care for a patient (generally over age 65) in a nursing facility or his or her residence following an injury.
Loss:
A reduction in the quality or value of a property, or a legal liability.
Loss Adjustment Expenses:
The sum insurers pay for investigating and settling insurance claims, including the cost of defending a lawsuit in court.
Loss Control Representative:
Insurance company employees, also called safety engineers, that perform loss control surveys or inspections, and prepare written loss control reports that outline their findings.
Loss Control Service:
Engineering or inspection service which assists the insured in reducing its exposure to loss.
Loss Costs:
The portion of an insurance rate used to cover claims and the costs of adjusting claims. Insurance companies typically determine their rates by estimating their future loss costs and adding a provision for expenses, profit, and contingencies.
Loss Expense—Unallocated:
Salaries and other expenses incurred in connection with the operation of a claims department of a property and liability insurance carrier which cannot be charged to individual claims.
Loss Exposure:
The possibility that a loss may occur.
Loss of Use:
A provision in homeowners and renters insurance policies that reimburses policyholders for any extra living expenses due to having to live elsewhere while their home is being restored following a disaster.
Loss Ratio:
In property and liability insurance, the percent that losses bear to premiums for a given period.
Loss Reserve:
The estimated liability on an insurer’s balance sheet for unpaid insurance claims or losses that have occurred as of a given reporting date. On an individual claim, the loss reserve is the estimate of what will ultimately be paid out on that case.
Malicious Mischief:
The willful or intentional damage to or destruction of another’s property. Coverage for malicious mischief is usually combined with the vandalism peril in insurance policies.
Malpractice Insurance:
Coverage afforded to a professional practitioner, such as a doctor or a lawyer, against liability claims for damages resulting from alleged negligence in the performance of the insured’s services.
Manual:
A book published by an insurance company, rating association or bureau, containing its rates, classifications and rules for rating a policy.
Marine Insurance:
See Inland Marine Insurance and Ocean Marine Insurance.
Material Damage:
Insurance against damage to a vehicle or boat itself. It includes automobile comprehensive, collision, fire and theft. Material damage and physical damage are terms that are often used interchangeably.
Maturity:
The date at which the endowment amount of a life policy becomes payable.
McCarran-Ferguson Act:
Federal law signed in 1945 in which Congress declared that states would continue to regulate the insurance business. Grants insurers a limited exemption from federal antitrust legislation.
Mediation:
Nonbinding procedure in which a third party attempts to resolve a conflict between two other parties.
Medical Payments Automobile Insurance:
Coverage in non-no-fault states, which pays medical and hospital expenses and the expense of funeral services resulting from an automobile accident, regardless of the liability of the insured. This is a first-party coverage.
Mine Subsidence Coverage:
An endorsement to a homeowners insurance policy, available in some states, for losses to a home caused by the land under a house sinking into a mine shaft. Excluded from standard homeowners policies, as are other forms of earth movement.
Mortgage Insurance:
(1) A basic type of life insurance or disability insurance purchased for the specific purpose of paying off any mortgage balance outstanding at death or paying mortgage payments while the insured is disabled. (2) ”Private mortgage insurance“ offers a method of providing minimum down payment residential mortgages by insuring mortgage lenders against losses in the event of borrower default.
Multi-Peril Policy:
A package policy that provides protection against a number of separate perils. Multi-peril policies are not necessarily multiple-line policies, since the combined perils may be all within one insurance line, such as property. (See Multiple-Line Policy.)
Multiple-Line Company:
A company that writes a variety of basic or traditional lines of insurance known as property and casualty (liability) insurance, such as auto, boat owners, homeowners, commercial, etc.
Multiple-Line Policy:
A package policy which combines coverages from both the traditional property and liability insurance lines.
Municipal Bond Insurance:
Coverage that guarantees bondholders timely payment of interest and principal even if the issuer of the bonds defaults. Offered by insurance companies with high credit ratings, the coverage raises the credit rating of a municipality offering the bond to that of the insurance company. It allows a municipality to raise money at lower interest rates. A form of financial guarantee insurance. (See Financial guarantee insurance.)
Named Peril:
Peril specifically mentioned as covered in an insurance policy.
Non-Admitted Company (Carrier):
An insurance company not licensed to do business in the state in question.
Non-Admitted Insurer:
Insurers licensed in some states, but not others. States where an insurer is not licensed call that insurer non-admitted. They sell coverage that is unavailable from licensed insurers within the state.
No-Fault Automobile Insurance:
A form of insurance by which a person’s financial losses resulting from an automobile accident, such as medical and hospital expenses and loss of income, are paid by his/her own insurance company without concern for who was at fault. The right to sue may be restricted in some cases.
Non-Forfeiture Options:
The choices available to an insured as to how the cost value of a life insurance policy will be received—as a lump-sum payment, as extended term insurance, or as reduced paid-up life insurance. These options guarantee that the cash value will not be forfeited by the insured.
Non-Participating Insurance:
See Guaranteed Cost Insurance.
No-Pay, No Play:
The idea that people who don’t buy coverage should not receive benefits. Prohibits uninsured drivers from collecting damages from insured drivers. In most states with this law, uninsured drivers may not sue for noneconomic damages such as pain and suffering. In other states, uninsured drivers are required to pay the equivalent of a large deductible ($10,000) before they can sue for property damages and another large deductible before they can sue for bodily harm.
Notice of Loss:
A written notice required by insurance companies immediately after an accident or other loss. Part of the standard provisions defining a policyholder’s responsibilities after a loss.
Nuclear Insurance:
Covers operators of nuclear reactors and other facilities for liability and property damage in the case of a nuclear accident and involves both private insurers and the federal government.
Nursing Home Insurance:
A form of long-term care policy that covers a policyholder’s stay in a nursing facility.
Obligee:
A person, firm, corporation or government agency protected by a surety bond.
Occupational Disease:
Abnormal condition or illness caused by factors associated with the workplace. Like occupational injuries, this is covered by workers compensation policies. (See Workers’ Compensation.)
Occupational Hazard:
Dangers inherent in an occupation which increase the risk of sickness or injury.
Occurrence Policy:
Insurance that pays claims arising out of incidents that occur during the policy term, even if they are filed many years later. (See Claims-Made Policy.)
Ocean Marine Insurance:
Coverage of all types of vessels and watercraft, for property damage to the vessel and cargo, including such risks as piracy and the jettisoning of cargo to save the property of others. Coverage for marine-related liabilities. War is excluded from basic policies, but can be bought back.
Omnibus Clause:
An automobile policy provision that covers persons driving the named insured’s auto with the named insured’s permission.
Open Competition States:
States where insurance companies can set new rates without prior approval, although the state’s commissioner can disallow them if they are not reasonable and adequate or are discriminatory.
Operating Expenses:
The cost of maintaining a business’ property, includes insurance, property taxes, utilities and rent, but excludes income tax, depreciation and other financing expenses.
Options:
Contracts that allow, but do not oblige, the buying or selling of property or assets at a certain date at a set price.
Ordinance of Law Coverage:
Endorsement to a property policy, including homeowners, that pays for the extra expense of rebuilding to comply with ordinances or laws, often building codes, that did not exist when the building was originally built. For example, a building severely damaged in a hurricane may have to be elevated above the flood line when it is rebuilt. This endorsement would cover part of the additional cost.
Original Equipment Manufacturer Parts (OEM):
Sheet metal auto parts made by the manufacturer of the vehicle. (See Generic Auto Parts.)
Other Than Collision Coverage:
See Comprehensive Automobile Insurance.
Package Policy:
A combination of two or more individual policies or coverages into a single policy. A homeowners policy, for example, is a package combining property, liability and theft coverages for the homeowner.
Paid Losses:
The actual dollar total that has been paid on incurred losses by issuing checks or drafts to claimants.
Partial Disability:
An impairment that prevents the insured from performing one or more, but not all, important duties of his/her job.
Participating Insurance:
The life insurance, sold by some life companies, on which dividends may be payable to policy owners. The amount and timing of the dividend payments are determined by the company board of directors.
Particular Average:
In ocean marine insurance, a concept providing that, where a portion of vessel or cargo is jettisoned to save the entire venture from peril at sea, the resulting loss is borne entirely by that individual owning the property that is damaged or sacrificed. No other interests contribute to payment of the loss. (Distinct from General Average.)
Pay-at-the-Pump:
A system proposed in the 1990s in which auto insurance premiums would be paid to state governments through a per-gallon surcharge on gasoline.
Peril:
The cause of a possible loss, such as fire, windstorm, theft, explosion or riot.
Permanent Insurance:
The type of life insurance that develops cash value and includes whole life, endowment, universal life and variable life insurance.
Persistency:
An insurance term used to refer to the probability of insurance remaining in force.
Personal Articles Floater:
A form of coverage designed to meet the needs for insurance on property of a movable nature. The coverage usually protects against all physical loss, subject to special exclusions and conditions. Examples of property covered include jewelry, furs, silverware and fine arts.
“Personal Injury” Liability Insurance:
Protects against liability for damages other than physical injury arising out of false arrest, detention or imprisonment, or malicious prosecution; libel, slander or defamation of character; invasion of privacy, wrongful eviction or wrongful entry.
Personal Injury Protection Automobile Insurance (PIP):
First-party coverage in no-fault states that usually pays for medical expenses, loss of income and certain other expenses resulting from an auto accident. Coverage’s scope varies widely by state law so no two states have identical coverages. (See No-Fault Automobile Insurance.)
Personal Lines:
Types of insurance written for individuals or families, rather than for businesses.
Personal Property:
This type of property is usually movable and easily transportable. On the other hand, real property generally is considered to be immovable, such as land and things affixed to it. A rule of thumb definition for personal property is “everything other than real property.”
Physical Hazard:
This refers to the material, structural or operational features of the risk itself, apart from the persons owning or managing it. Electrical wiring, building construction and type of heating system are examples of physical hazards.
Physical Loss Form:
This property coverage protects against loss from risk of physical loss to buildings except as limited or excluded in the form.
Point of Service (POS) Plan:
An HMO that offers an indemnity-type option. The primary care doctors in a POS plan make referrals to other providers in the plan. However, members can refer themselves outside the plan and still get some coverage as well.
Policies-in-Force:
Policies written and recorded on the books of the carrier which are unexpired as of a given date. Usually applies to property and liability insurance.
Policy:
The name generally used to mean the written contract of insurance.
Policyholder:
One who owns an insurance policy. A mortgagee often is issued a copy of an insurance policy or certificate of insurance at the request of the insured, but it is not a policyholder.
Policyholders’ Surplus:
The sum an insurance company has remaining after all liabilities are deducted from all assets. Sums such as paid-in capital and special voluntary reserves are also included in this term. This surplus is one form of financial protection to policyholders in the event a company suffers unexpected or catastrophic losses.
Policy Loan:
The borrowing against a life insurance policy’s cash value.
Political Risk Insurance:
Coverage for businesses operating abroad against loss due to political upheaval such as war, revolution, or confiscation of property.
Pollution Insurance:
Policies that cover property loss and liability arising from pollution-related damages, for sites that have been inspected and found uncontaminated. It is usually written on a claims-made basis so policies pay only claims presented during the term of the policy or within a specified time frame after the policy expires.
Pool:
An organization of insurers or reinsurers through which particular types of risks are underwritten with premiums, losses and expenses shared in agreed ratios.
Pre-Existing Condition:
A physical condition that existed prior to the issuance of an insurance policy.
Premises:
The building, other structures and land where the insurance protection is applicable. It is usually described and defined in the property and casualty policy.
Premium:
The amount of money charged a policyholder for an insurance policy. (Also see Direct Premiums Written, Earned Premium, Net Premiums Written, Unearned Premium.)
Premium Auditor:
A person who examines a liability insurance policyholder’s insurance records (sales, payroll, etc.) at the end of the policy term to determine if the basis for the premium charge has either increased or decreased. If the audited premium is less than originally estimated and paid, the policyholder will receive a refund; if greater, the policyholder will receive a statement for the balance.
Premium Tax:
A state tax on premiums paid by its residents and businesses and collected by insurers.
Premiums in Force:
The sum of the face amounts, plus dividend additions, of life insurance policies outstanding at a given time.
Premiums Written:
The total premiums on all policies written by an insurer during a specified period of time, regardless of what portions have been earned. Net premiums written are premiums written after reinsurance transactions.
Primary Company:
In a reinsurance transaction, the insurance company that is reinsured.
Primary Market:
Market for new issue securities where the proceeds go directly to the issuer.
Prime Rate:
Interest rate that banks charge to their most creditworthy customers. Banks set this rate according to their cost of funds and market forces.
Principal:
In suretyship, the party whose honesty or performance is guaranteed.
Prior Approval States:
States where insurance companies must file proposed rate changes with state regulators, and gain approval before they can go into effect.
Private Mortgage Insurance:
See Mortgage Insurance.
Private Placement:
Securities that are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and are sold directly to investors.
Producer:
Any person directly involved in the sale of insurance.
Product Liability:
A section of tort law that determines who may sue and who may be sued for damages when a defective product injures someone. No uniform federal laws guide manufacturer’s liability, but under strict liability, the injured party can hold the manufacturer responsible for damages without the need to prove negligence or fault.
Product Liability Insurance:
Protects manufacturers’ and distributors’ exposure to lawsuits by people who have sustained bodily injury or property damage through the use of the product.
Professional Liability Insurance:
Covers professionals for negligence and errors or omissions that injure their clients.
Proof of Loss:
Documents showing the insurance company that a loss occurred.
Property/Casualty Insurance:
Covers damage to or loss of policyholders’ property and legal liability for damages caused to other people or their property. Property/casualty insurance, which includes auto, homeowners and commercial insurance, is one segment of the insurance industry. The other sector is life/health. Outside the United States, property/casualty insurance is referred to as nonlife or general insurance.
Property/Casualty Insurance Cycle:
Industry business cycle with recurrent periods of hard and soft market conditions. In the 1950s and 1960s, cycles were regular with three year periods each of hard and soft market conditions in almost all lines of property/casualty insurance. Since then they have been less regular and less frequent.
Property Damage Liability Insurance:
Protection against loss from legal liability for damage to the property of another.
Property Insurance:
Provides financial protection against loss or damage to the insured’s property, other than automobile, caused by specified perils, such as fire, windstorm, hail, explosion, riot, aircraft, motor vehicles, vandalism, malicious mischief, riot and civil commotion, and smoke.
Proposition 103:
A November 1988 California ballot initiative that called for a statewide auto insurance rate rollback and for rates to be based more on driving records and less on geographical location. The initiative changed many aspects of the state’s insurance system and was the subject of lawsuits for more than a decade.
Protection Amount:
The face amount of a life insurance policy, or amount of money that will be paid to a beneficiary upon the death of an insured—depending upon the policy. This amount will be reduced by the amount of any outstanding policy loan.
Proximate Cause:
The dominating cause of loss or damage; an unbroken chain of events between the occurrence of an insured peril and damage to property. As an illustration, weather damage occurring from fire-fighting activities is covered under the fire policy because fire was the proximate cause of the loss.
Public Liability Insurance:
A broad term meaning insurance to cover professional and commercial risks against liability exposures other than those involving employees or arising out of ownership or use of autos or airplanes.
Purchasing Group:
An entity that offers insurance to groups of similar businesses with similar exposures to risk.
Rain Insurance:
Insurance protection against loss due to rain, hail, snow or sleet, which causes cancellation or reduced earnings of an outdoor event.
Rate:
A charge per unit in determining insurance premiums.
Rate Regulation:
The process by which states monitor insurance companies’ rate changes, done either through prior approval or open competition models. (See Open Competition States; Prior Approval States.)
Rating Agencies:
Six major credit agencies determine insurers’ financial strength and viability to meet claims obligations. They are A.M. Best Co.; Duff & Phelps Inc.; Fitch, Inc.; Mayday’s Investors Services; Standard & Poor’s Corp.; and Weiss Ratings, Inc. Factors considered include company earnings, capital adequacy, operating leverage, liquidity, investment performance, reinsurance programs, and management ability, integrity and experience. A high financial rating is not the same as a high consumer satisfaction rating.
Rating Bureau:
An organization that gathers statistics, makes rates and/or creates policy forms and provides other services for the property and casualty insurers affiliated with the bureau.
Rating Territory:
In various property and casualty lines, a geographical grouping within which insureds are likely to share an exposure to similar risks. Grouping of insureds within a territory helps establish equitable rates for the territory.
Real Estate Investments:
Investments generally owned by life insurers that include commercial mortgage loans and real property.
Receivables:
Amounts owed to a business for goods or services provided.
Redlining:
An illegal act to refuse to lend money or issue insurance based only on geographic area.
Reinstatement:
The restoration of a lapsed life or health insurance policy to its original premium-paying status—usually after evidence of good health has been submitted and past-due premiums have been paid.
Reinsurance:
An arrangement by which one insurer transfers all or a portion of its risk under a policy or group of policies to another insurer (reinsurer). Thus reinsurance is insurance purchased by an insurance company from another insurer, to reduce risk for the original insurer.
Reinsurance Facility:
An alternative mechanism to service those insureds who cannot obtain insurance in the voluntary market. Premiums and losses for the business that is ceded to the facility are pooled and all insurers share according to their proportion of the voluntary market.
Renters Policy:
A package type of insurance that includes coverage similar to a homeowners policy to cover the personal property of a renter or tenant in a building.
Rents or Rental Value Coverages:
Insurance against loss of the rental value of a property; protects against loss of rents resulting from an insured peril.
Replacement Cost Property Coverage:
Insurance under which the amount payable is the current replacement cost of the property new, rather than the depreciated value. Applies to the building structures (in most cases) and can apply to contents in some policies.
Reserve:
(1) An amount representing actual or potential liabilities kept by an insurer to cover obligations to policyholders and third-party claimants. (2) An amount allocated for a special purpose. Note that a reserve is usually a liability and not an extra fund. On occasion, a reserve may be an asset, such as a reserve for taxes not yet due.
Residual Market:
A general term describing the total of all consumers who have had difficulty purchasing insurance through normal channels. Automobile Insurance Plans, FAIR Plans, Reinsurance Facilities and Joint Underwriting Associations all service this market.
Retention:
The net amount of risk retained by an insurance company for its own account or that of specified others, and not reinsured.
Retrocession:
The reinsurance bought by reinsurers to protect their financial stability.
Retrospective Rating:
Rating procedure that allows adjustment of an insured’s final rate on the basis of the insured’s own loss experience.
Rider:
Additional provision added to a policy by issuance of an amending document.
(See Endorsement.)
Risk:
Chance of loss with respect to person, liability or the property of the insured. Also is used to mean “the insured.”
Risk-Based Capital:
The need for insurance companies to be capitalized according to the inherent riskiness of the type of insurance they sell. Higher-risk types of insurance, liability as opposed to property business, generally necessitate higher levels of capital
Risk Management:
The management of the various risks that might affect a business firm. Its purpose is to identify potential loss situations and control or reduce them through insurance, elimination of risk, or improved or additional safety practices.
Risk Retention Groups:
Insurance companies that band together as self-insurers and form an organization that is chartered and licensed as an insurer in at least one state to handle liability insurance.
Robbery:
The loss of property due to theft when a person is threatened with physical harm or injury.
Sales Expense:
Compensation of agents, advertising expense and other costs related to selling insurance policies.
Salvage:
Property damaged to the extent that it is not economical to perform repairs, taken over by an insurer after it has paid a claim, to reduce its loss by “salvaging” the remaining value of the property.
Schedule:
A list describing the property or items insured under the policy and the extent to which they are insured.
Secondary Market:
Market for previously issued and outstanding securities.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC):
The organization that oversees publicly-held insurance companies. Those companies make periodic financial disclosures to the SEC, including an annual financial statement (or 10K), and a quarterly financial statement (or 10-Q). Companies must also disclose any material events and other information about their stock.
Securities Outstanding:
Stock held by shareholders.
Securitization of Insurance Risk:
Using the capital markets to expand and diversify the assumption of insurance risk. The issuance of bonds or notes to third-party investors directly or indirectly by an insurance or reinsurance company or a pooling entity as a means of raising money to cover risks. (See Catastrophe Bonds.)
Self-Insurance:
A form of risk financing through which a firm assumes all or a part of its own losses. Self-insurers may purchase insurance to cover excess losses.
Severity:
Size of a loss. One of the criteria used in calculating premiums rates.
Sewer-Drain Back-Up Coverage:
An optional part of homeowners insurance that covers sewers.
Shared Market:
See Residual Market.
Soft Market:
A condition where insurance premiums are lowered and the availability of insurance is high. Opposite of a hard insurance market.
Solicitor:
A person authorized by an agent to solicit and receive applications for insurance.
Solvency:
Insurance companies’ ability to pay the claims of policyholders. Regulations to promote solvency include minimum capital and surplus requirements, statutory accounting conventions, limits to insurance company investment and corporate activities, financial ratio tests, and financial data disclosure.
Special Multi-Peril Policy (SMP):
A business policy which combines in one contract the coverages normally purchased under several policies. Many options and endorsements are available to tailor it to the policyholder’s needs.
Specified Perils:
See Named Peril.
Speculative Risk:
A type of risk with three possible outcomes: gain, loss or no change.
Spread of Risk:
The selling of insurance in multiple areas to multiple policyholders to minimize the danger that all policyholders will have losses at the same time. Companies are more likely to insure perils that offer a good spread of risk. Flood insurance is an example of a poor spread of risk because the people most likely to buy it are the people close to rivers and other bodies of water that flood. (See Adverse Selection.)
Stacking:
Practice that increases the money available to pay auto liability claims. In states where this practice is permitted by law, courts may allow policyholders who have several cars insured under a single policy, or multiple vehicles insured under different policies, to add up the limit of liability available for each vehicle.
Standard Provisions:
Policy provisions required by law.
Standard Risk:
A person who according to a company’s underwriting standards is entitled to insurance without extra rating or special restrictions.
Statutory Accounting Principles (SAP):
Those principles required by statute that must be followed by an insurance company when submitting its financial statements to the various state insurance departments. Such principles differ from Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in some important respects. For example, SAP requires that expenses must be recorded immediately and cannot be deferred to track with premiums as they are earned and taken into revenue.
Statutory Underwriting Profit or Loss:
Earnings or losses as shown by an insurer on its Statutory Income Statement (convention blank) as required by state insurance departments. More specifically: (1) the profit or loss realized from insurance operations as distinct from that realized from investments; (2) the excess of premiums over losses and expenses (profit), or the excess of losses and expenses over premiums (loss).
Stock Company:
A company organized and owned by stockholders, as distinguished from the mutual form of company, which is owned by its policyholders.
Stopgap Endorsement:
Provides employer liability coverage for work-related injury arising out of incidental operations or exposure in the monopolistic fund states.
Structured Settlement:
Legal agreement to pay a designated person, usually someone who has been injured, a specified sum of money in periodic payments, usually for his or her lifetime, instead of in a single lump sum payment. (See Annuity.)
Subrogation:
A principle of law incorporated in insurance policies that enables an insurance company, after paying a loss to its insured, to recover the amount of the loss from another who is legally liable for it.
Substandard or Extra Risk:
An individual who, because of health history or physical limitations, does not measure up to the qualifications of a standard life or health insurance risk.
Superfund:
A federal law enacted in 1980 to initiate cleanup of the nation’s abandoned hazardous waste dump sites and to respond to accidents that release hazardous substances into the environment. The law is officially called the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act.
Surety Bond:
An agreement providing for monetary compensation should there be a failure to perform specified acts within a stated period. The surety company, for example, becomes responsible for fulfillment of a contract if the contractor defaults.
Suretyship:
Contractual relationship in which one party (surety) guarantees another party (obligee) against the default or misperformance of a third party (principal). (See Fidelity Bond and Surety Bond.)
Surplus:
A stock company’s surplus is the amount by which its admitted assets exceed its liabilities and capital stock. In both stock and mutual companies, the term surplus-to-policyholders means the excess of admitted assets over liabilities.
Surplus Lines:
A term originating in property/casualty insurance, used to describe any risk or part thereof for which insurance is not available through a company licensed in the applicant’s state (an “admitted” insurer). The business, therefore, is placed with “non-admitted” insurers (insurers not licensed in the state) in accordance with surplus or excess lines provisions of state insurance laws. These provisions generally allow operations on a relatively unregulated basis; that is, the non-admitted insurer is not subject to the same rate or coverage requirements that apply to an admitted insurer.
Surrender Charge:
A charge for withdrawals from an annuity contract before a designated surrender charge period, usually from five to seven years.
Swaps:
The simultaneous buying, selling or exchange of one security for another among investors to change maturities in a bond portfolio, for example, or because investment goals have changed.
Syndicate:
A group of insurers or underwriters that join to insure certain property that may be of such value or high hazard or so expensive to underwrite that it can be covered more safely or efficiently on a cooperative basis.
Tenants Policy:
See Renters Policy.
Term:
A period of time for which a policy is issued.
Term Insurance:
Life insurance protection during a limited number of years but expiring without value if the insured survives the stated period.
Territorial Rating:
A method of classifying risks by geographic location to set a fair price for coverage. The location of the insured may have a considerable impact on the cost of losses. The chance of an accident or theft is much higher in an urban area than in a rural one, for example.
Terrorism Coverage:
Included as a part of the package in standard commercial insurance policies before September 11, 2001 virtually free of charge. Since September 11, terrorism coverage prices have increased substantially to reflect the current risk.
Theft Insurance:
Protection for loss of property due to stealing, including burglary, robbery and larceny.
Third-Party Administrator:
Outside group that performs clerical functions for an insurance company.
Third-Party Coverage:
Liability coverage purchased by the policyholder as a protection against possible lawsuits filed by a third party. The insured and the insurer are the first and second parties to the insurance contract. (See First-Party Coverage.)
Threshold:
Used in no-fault auto insurance to remove non-serious cases from the tort system by establishing a point of “threshold” that must be met or exceeded to sue in tort. Of those states and the District of Columbia that have no-fault auto insurance, many, including the District of Columbia, have a threshold in their plan. There are three types of thresholds: the dollar threshold, the disability threshold and the verbal threshold.
Title Insurance:
An insurance contract relating to real estate described in the policy which protects the insured landowner against loss or damage by reason of defects, liens or encumbrances in the insured title, if these faults exist at the date of the policy and are not expressly excluded from its terms.
Tort:
Any wrongful act, damage or injury done willfully, negligently or in circumstances involving strict liability, but not involving breach of contract, for which a civil lawsuit can be brought.
Tort Law:
The body of law governing negligence, intentional interference, and other wrongful acts for which civil action can be brought, except for breach of contract, which is covered by contract law.
Tort Reform:
Refers to legislation designed to reduce liability costs through limits on various kinds of damages and through modification of liability rules.
Total Disability:
Disability that prevents a person from performing (a) any of his/her occupational duties, or (b) any duties for which he/she is reasonably qualified. Definitions vary within policies.
Total Loss:
The condition of an automobile or other property when damage is so extensive that repair costs would exceed the value of the vehicle or property.
Towing Coverage:
Insures against charges for towing and road service at the place of disablement, with a maximum amount stipulated for each occurrence.
Transparency:
A term used to explain the way information on financial matters, such as financial reports and actions of companies or markets, are communicated so that they are easily understood and frank.
Travel Insurance:
Insurance to cover problems associated with traveling, generally including trip cancellation due to illness, lost luggage and other incidents.
Treaty Reinsurance:
A general reinsurance agreement between the ceding or primary company and the reinsurer containing the contractual terms under which a portion or all of the primary company’s business or a particular class is passed on to the reinsurer.
Umbrella Liability Policy:
A form of insurance protection against losses in excess of amounts covered by other liability insurance policies; also protects the insured in many situations not covered by the usual liability policies. This policy is available for both personal and commercial lines coverage.
Unbundled Contracts:
A form of annuity contract that gives purchasers the freedom to choose among certain optional features in their contract.
Underinsurance:
The result of the policyholder’s failure to buy sufficient insurance. An underinsured policyholder may only receive part of the cost of replacing or repairing damaged items covered in the policy.
Underinsured Motorists Coverage (UIM):
Coverage is intended to cover you and passengers in your car for losses unpaid because sufficient bodily injury liability limits are not available from the policy of an at-fault driver. How and under what circumstances the coverage becomes operative varies in different states.
Underwriter:
An employee of an insurance company who is a selector of risks. The underwriter is expected to select business that will produce an average risk of loss no greater than anticipated for the class of business. In the life insurance industry, “underwriter” may also mean an agent or other field representative who is referred to as a “field underwriter.”
Underwriting:
The process of selecting risks for insurance and determining in what amounts and on what terms the insurance company accepts the risk.
Underwriting Profit or Loss:
The profit or loss experienced by a property/casualty insurance company after deducting from earned premiums the incurred losses and expenses of doing business, but before provision of federal income tax. It excludes investment income.
Unearned Premium:
The portion of a property/casualty insurance premium that applies to the unexpired portion of the policy period.
Uninsurable Risk:
Risks for which it is difficult for someone to get insurance. (See Insurable Risk.)
Uninsured Motorists Coverage:
Pays the policyholder and passengers in his/her car for losses sustained by reason of bodily injury, sickness, disease or death caused by the owner or operator of an uninsured automobile or a “hit-and-run” driver.
Uninsured Motorists Property Damage Coverage (UMPD):
Provides coverage to a vehicle involved in an accident with an uninsured motorist. UMPD is similar to “collision coverage,” and is not available to those who purchase collision coverage.
Valuation:
The process of determining a company’s liabilities under its policy obligations is known as policy valuation. The process of determining the value of a company’s investments is known as asset valuation. Minimum valuation standards are usually prescribed by state laws.
Valued Policy:
An insurance policy under which the insurance company is obligated to pay the full amount of the policy written to insure real property against loss by fire (and, sometimes, other perils) when the property insured is totally destroyed. Several states have laws that are known as Valued Policy Laws.
Vandalism:
Willful, intentional, often random, destruction or defacement of private or public property. Insurance against the vandalism peril is usually combined with the malicious mischief peril.
Variable Life Insurance:
A type of permanent life insurance in which the death benefit and the policy value vary in relation to the investment experience of a selected fund in which the policy values are invested.
Verbal Threshold:
In no-fault auto insurance states with the verbal threshold, victims are allowed to sue in tort only if their injuries meet certain verbal descriptions of the types of injuries that should, as a matter of policy, render one eligible to seek to recover for pain and suffering in a cause of action in tort.
Viatical Settlement Companies:
Insurance firms that buy life insurance policies at a steep discount from policyholders who are often terminally ill and need the payment for medications or treatments. The companies provide early payouts to the policyholder, assume the premium payments, and collect the face value of the policy upon the policyholder’s death.
Void:
A policy contract that for some reason specified in the policy becomes free of all legal effect. One example under which a policy could be voided is when information a policyholder provided is proven untrue.
Volatility:
A measure of the degree of fluctuation in a stock’s price. Volatility is exemplified by large, frequent price swings up and down.
Volcano Coverage:
Most homeowners policies cover damage from a volcanic eruption.
Volume:
Number of shares a stock trades either per day or per week.
Voluntary Market:
The market where a person seeking insurance obtains it with no help from the state, through an insurer of his or her own selection.
Waiver:
The surrender of a right or privilege. In life insurance, a provision that sets certain conditions, such as disablement, which allow coverage to remain in force without payment of premiums.
War Risk:
Special coverage on cargo in overseas ships against the risk of being confiscated by a government in wartime. It is excluded from standard ocean marine insurance and can be purchased separately. It often excludes cargo awaiting shipment on a wharf or on ships after 15 days of arrival in port.
Water-Damage Insurance Coverage:
Protection provided in most homeowners insurance policies against sudden and accidental water damage, from burst pipes for example. Does not cover damage from problems resulting from a lack of proper maintenance such as dripping air conditioners. Water damage from floods is covered under separate flood insurance policies issued by the federal government.
Weather Derivative:
An insurance or securities product used as a hedge by energy-related businesses and others whose sales tend to fluctuate depending on the weather.
Weather Insurance:
A type of business interruption insurance that compensates for financial losses caused by adverse weather conditions, such as constant rain on the day scheduled for a major outdoor concert.
Workers’ Compensation:
A system (established under state laws) under which employers provide insurance for benefit payments to employees for their work-related injury, death and disease regardless of fault. Not to be mistaken as health insurance.
Wrap-Up Insurance:
Broad policy coordinated to cover liability exposures for a large group of businesses that have something in common. Might be used to insure all businesses working on a large construction project, such as an apartment complex.
Write:
To insure, underwrite or accept an application for insurance.
Written Premiums:
See Premiums Written.
Sources: Original glossary reprinted, with permission, Allstate Insurance Company, Northbrook, IL, with all rights. Excerpts also from Insuring Your Business, by Sean Mooney, Chief Economist, Director of Research, and Senior Vice President at Guy Carpenter & Company in New York, and former economist, Insurance Information Institute; Ensuring Availability: Residual Property Insurance Plans, Property Insurance Plans Service Office and The Buyers’ Guide to Business Insurance, PSI Research. Additional glossary terms from online glossary of the Insurance Information Institute, www.iii.org/media/glossary/.
Annual Deductible is the amount you must pay each year for medical and mental health expenses before your medical plan begins to pay benefits. For example, if your health plan has a $300 Annual Deductible, you will pay all your medical expenses up to $300 after which your health insurance plan will begin paying a percentage of your expenses, according to your plan benefits. The Annual Deductible does not include monthly insurance premium or set-dollar copayments for prescription drugs and doctor visits.
Annual Maximum Per Injury or illness (or Annual Per Injury/illness Maximum). Some health plans limit the total benefit amount they will pay for each injury or illness during the plan year. For example, if you break an arm, your plan will pay only up to $20,000 for all care related to that injury if the plan has a $20,000 benefit limit for each injury. The plan will continue to pay benefits for other conditions but only up to the “per injury or illness maximum” for that plan year. If your plan has a “per injury or illness” annual limit or maximum, it should be stated on your benefit summary or in your benefit booklet.
Annual Out-of-Pocket Maximum is the most you will have to pay out of your own pocket for health care expenses during the year. UC SHIP adheres to the benefit standards of the Affordable Care Act, so the Out-of-Pocket Maximum includes health care expenses you have paid, including coinsurance, annual deductible and other deductibles (such as a deductible for hospital stays, for example), as well as copayments you are required to pay for medical, behavioral health and pharmacy services during the plan year, after which your medical, behavioral health and pharmacy care expenses are covered at 100% for the rest of that plan year.
This maximum does not include insurance premium, or the cost of health care your insurance plan doesn’t cover. If you’re not sure how to answer this question, ask your health plan customer service representative.
Coinsurance refers to the cost-sharing of medical expenses; the insurance company pays a portion of the expenses and you, the insured, pay the remaining expenses. “Coinsurance” usually refers to the percentage of medical expenses for which you are responsible after the insurance company pays according to your plan’s benefits. For example, if a hospital charges $1,000 for surgical services and your insurance plan pays 70%, the insurance company would pay $700 and you would pay the remaining $300 (30% coinsurance). (This example assumes a network hospital, so there are no charges above what your insurance company considers an “allowed amount.”)
Annual Deductible is the amount you must pay each year for medical and mental health expenses before your medical plan begins to pay benefits. For example, if your health plan has a $300 Annual Deductible, you will pay all your medical expenses up to $300 after which your health insurance plan will begin paying a percentage of your expenses, according to your plan benefits. The Annual Deductible does not include monthly insurance premium or set-dollar copayments for prescription drugs and doctor visits.
Annual Maximum Per Injury or illness (or Annual Per Injury/illness Maximum). Some health plans limit the total benefit amount they will pay for each injury or illness during the plan year. For example, if you break an arm, your plan will pay only up to $20,000 for all care related to that injury if the plan has a $20,000 benefit limit for each injury. The plan will continue to pay benefits for other conditions but only up to the “per injury or illness maximum” for that plan year. If your plan has a “per injury or illness” annual limit or maximum, it should be stated on your benefit summary or in your benefit booklet.
Annual Out-of-Pocket Maximum is the most you will have to pay out of your own pocket for health care expenses during the year. UC SHIP adheres to the benefit standards of the Affordable Care Act, so the Out-of-Pocket Maximum includes health care expenses you have paid, including coinsurance, annual deductible and other deductibles (such as a deductible for hospital stays, for example), as well as copayments you are required to pay for medical, behavioral health and pharmacy services during the plan year, after which your medical, behavioral health and pharmacy care expenses are covered at 100% for the rest of that plan year.
This maximum does not include insurance premium, or the cost of health care your insurance plan doesn’t cover. If you’re not sure how to answer this question, ask your health plan customer service representative.
Coinsurance refers to the cost-sharing of medical expenses; the insurance company pays a portion of the expenses and you, the insured, pay the remaining expenses. “Coinsurance” usually refers to the percentage of medical expenses for which you are responsible after the insurance company pays according to your plan’s benefits. For example, if a hospital charges $1,000 for surgical services and your insurance plan pays 70%, the insurance company would pay $700 and you would pay the remaining $300 (30% coinsurance). (This example assumes a network hospital, so there are no charges above what your insurance company considers an “allowed amount.”)
How do you know if your plan has “no coinsurance?” HMO plans, for example, usually have low set-dollar copayments members pay for medical services but no coinsurance. If your plan covers hospital stays, surgical services, laboratory tests, and other diagnostic services at 100% after a set-dollar copayment (such as $15 for an ultra-sound test) or a deductible (such as $500 per hospitalization; then 100% coverage), your plan does not have coinsurance.
Group Insurance Plan. If your health insurance is provided by your parents’, your spouse/partner’s, or your employer, you probably have group insurance. Companies with a certain number of employees (usually greater than 20) are able to obtain employee health insurance based on underwriting of the whole employee group together (rather than basing rates on each individual separately) which results in lower rates for the group.
Individual insurance is a plan you can purchase on your own directly from the insurance company or an insurance agent. Often you can apply for insurance through a health benefit exchange such as Covered California, with an online broker such as ehealthinsurance.com, or directly from an insurance company. For individual insurance your monthly premium rate is based upon the benefit plan you select, your age and residence zip code. State exchanges such as Covered California, may offer premium subsidies for low-income individuals.
Inpatient and Outpatient. You are “inpatient” if you are admitted to the hospital for medical, mental health, or surgical services and provided meals, lodging, and care overnight, or longer. “Outpatient” refers to obtaining services outside the hospital, such as in a doctor’s office, an urgent care center, a free-standing surgical center (“outpatient surgery”) or some other setting outside a hospital facility; outpatient services can also be provided in a hospital facility, such as emergency services or a surgical procedure, if the patient is released within 24 hours of admission.
Lifetime Maximum Benefit. Some health plans limit the benefit amount they will pay for all your health care expenses together. Once this benefit limit is reached, whether you’ve been covered under the plan for one year or many years, your coverage under that insurance plan will end. Lifetime benefit maximum is not allowed under the Affordable Care Act standards for health plans, but some types of health plans may still have a Lifetime Maximum through 2015.
Repatriation of Remains coverage provides transport of your remains back to your home country if you should die while traveling abroad and covered by the plan.
Subscriber (or primary enrollee). If you have insurance through your parent’s, spouse’s, or registered domestic partner’s employer, the parent/spouse/ or domestic partner who is covering you as a dependent under his or her health insurance plan would be the primary subscriber, sometimes called primary enrollee. If, on the other hand, you have your own individual plan or a plan through your own employer, you would be the primary enrollee/subscriber.
Accountable Care Organization (ACO): A group of health care providers who give coordinated care, chronic disease management, and thereby improve the quality of patient care. The “organization’s” payment is tied to achieving health care quality goals and outcomes that result in cost savings. ACOs can include various types of doctors – primary care, specialists, etc. – as well as other medical providers (nurses, physician’s assistants, etc.) and institutions (hospitals, multi-physician practices).
Actuarial Value: The percentage of total average costs for covered benefits that a plan will cover. Example: if a plan has an actuarial value of 70%, on average you would be responsible for 30% of the costs of all covered benefits. However, you could be responsible for a higher or lower percentage of the total costs of covered services for the year, depending on your actual health care needs and the terms of your insurance policy.
Affordable Care Act (ACA): The comprehensive health care reform law enacted in March 2010. The law was enacted in two parts: The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was signed into law on March 23, 2010 and was amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act on March 30, 2010. Affordable Care Act refers to the final, amended version of the law.
Allowed Charge: Discounted fees that insurers will recognize and pay for covered services. Insurers negotiate these discounts with providers in their health plan network, and network providers agree to accept the allowed charge as payment in full. Each insurer has its own schedule of allowed charges.
Annual Limit: A cap on the benefits your insurance company will pay in a year while you’re enrolled in a health insurance plan. Annual caps are sometimes placed on particular services such as prescriptions or hospitalizations. Annual limits may be placed on the dollar amount of covered services or on the number of visits for a particular service. After the annual limit is reached, you must pay all associated health care costs for the rest of the year.
Balance Billing: The practice of billing a patient for charges not paid by his/her insurance plan because the charges are in excess of covered amounts. Balance billing amounts will often be charges that are above the usual and customary rates.
Benefits: The health care items or services covered under a health insurance plan. Covered benefits and excluded services are defined in the health insurance plan’s coverage documents. In Medicaid or
CHIP, covered benefits and excluded services are defined in state program rules.
Biosimilar Biological Products: The generic version of more complicated medications. Technically, they are reproductions of biotechnologically manufactured biopharmaceuticals that partially mimic proteins naturally present in the body.
Care Coordination: The process of organizing your treatment across several health care providers. Medical homes and accountable care organizations (see definition) are two common ways to coordinate care.
Chronic Disease Management: An integrated care approach to managing illness – typically using multiple health care providers including various physicians, nurses, and others – which includes screenings, check-ups, monitoring and coordinating treatment, and patient education. It can improve quality of life while reducing health care costs if you have a chronic disease, by preventing or minimizing the effects of a disease.
Claim: A request for payment that you or your health care provider submits to your health insurer when you get items or services you think are covered.
COBRA: It stands for Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act. A federal law that may allow you to temporarily keep health coverage if your employment ends, you lose coverage as a dependent of the covered employee, or if there is another qualifying event. COBRA requires you pay 100% of the premiums, including the share the employer used to pay, plus a small administrative fee.
Co-insurance: A form of medical cost sharing in a health insurance plan that requires an insured person to pay a stated percentage of medical expenses after the deductible amount, if any, was paid. Once any deductible amount and coinsurance are paid, the insurer is responsible for the rest of the reimbursement for covered benefits up to allowed charges: the individual could also be responsible for any charges in excess of what the insurer determines to be ‘usual, customary and reasonable.’
Community Rating: A rule that prevents health insurers from varying premiums for individuals and families on factors such as age, gender, and health. Most states do not have community rating and thus permit premiums to vary based on these factors.
Copayment: A flat dollar amount you must pay for a covered program. Example: you may have to pay a $15 copayment for each covered visit to a primary care doctor.
Cost Sharing: The share of costs covered by your insurance that you pay out of pocket. Generally includes deductibles, coinsurance and copayments, or similar charges, but it doesn’t include premiums, balance billing amounts for non-network providers, or the cost of non-covered services. Cost sharing in Medicaid and CHIP also includes premiums.
Creditable Coverage: Health insurance coverage under any of the following: a group health plan; individual health insurance; student health insurance; Medicare; Medicaid; CHAMPUS and TRICARE; Veterans Administration (VA) coverage; the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program; Indian Health Service; the Peace Corps; Public Health Plan (any plan established or maintained by a State, the U.S. government, a foreign country), including the new federal high risk pool (PCIP, or the Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Program); Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) or a state health insurance high risk pool. If you have prior creditable coverage, it will reduce the length of a pre-existing condition
exclusion period under new job-based coverage. Depending on state law, this may also apply to other types of coverage – such as state high risk pools – in your state.
Deductible: The amount you must pay for covered care before your health insurance begins to pay. Insurers apply and structure deductibles differently. Example: under one plan, a comprehensive deductible might apply to all services while another plan might have separate deductibles for benefits such as prescription drug coverage.
Dependent Coverage: Insurance coverage for family members of the policyholder, such as spouses, children, or partners.
Disability: A limit in a range of major life activities. This includes activities like seeing, hearing, walking and tasks like thinking and working. Different state, federal or private programs may have different disability standards. A legal definition of disability can be found at: www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm.
Donut Hole, Medicare Prescription Drug: Most plans with Medicare prescription drug coverage (Part D) have a coverage gap, called a donut hole. This means that after you and your drug plan have spent a certain amount of money for covered drugs, you have to pay all costs out of pocket for your prescriptions up to a yearly limit. Once you have spent up to the yearly limit, your coverage gap ends and your drug plan helps pay for covered drugs again.
Early Periodic Screening, Diagnostic & Treatment Services (EPSDT): The comprehensive set of benefits covered for children in Medicaid.
Emergency Room Services: Evaluation and treatment of an illness, injury, or condition that needs immediate medical attention in an emergency room.
Essential Health Benefits: A set of health care service categories that must be covered by certain plans, starting in 2014. The Affordable Care Act defines essential health benefits to “include at least the following general categories and the items and services covered within the categories: ambulatory patient services; emergency services; hospitalization; maternity and newborn care; mental health and substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; prescription drugs; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; laboratory services; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and pediatric services, including oral and vision care.’’
Insurance policies must cover these benefits in order to be certified and offered in Exchanges, and all Medicaid state plans must cover these services by 2014.
Starting with plan years or policy years that began on or after September 23, 2010, health plans can no longer impose a lifetime dollar limit on spending for these services. All plans, except grandfathered individual health insurance policies, must begin phasing out annual dollar spending limits for these services starting with plan/policy years that began on or after September 23, 2010. For the majority of health insurance plans, annual dollar limits on essential health benefits will be completely phased out by 2014.
The Department of Health and Human Services is working with a number of partners to develop the essential health benefits package. In the fall of 2011, HHS will launch an effort to collect public comment and hear directly from all Americans who are interested in sharing their thoughts on this important issue. Learn more about this process at www.healthcare.gov.
Exchange: A new transparent and competitive insurance marketplace where individuals and small businesses can buy affordable and qualified health benefit plans. Exchanges will offer a choice of health plans that meet certain benefits and cost standards.
Exclusions: Items or services that aren’t covered under a contract for insurance and which an insurance company won’t pay. Example: your policy may not cover pregnancy care or any services related to a pre-existing condition.
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA): A federal law that guarantees up to 12 weeks of job protected leave for certain employees when they need to take time off due to serious illness or disability, to have or adopt a child, or to care for another family member. When on leave under FMLA, you can continue coverage under your job-based plan. Learn more about FMLA at http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/.
Federal Poverty Level (FPL): A measure of income level issued annually by the Department of Health and Human Services. FPL is used to determine eligibility for certain programs and benefits. For more information on FPL please visit http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/11poverty.shtml. .
Fee for Service: A reimbursement plan in which doctors and other health care providers are paid for each service performed, such as for tests and office visits.
Flexible Benefits Plan: Offers employees a choice between various benefits including cash, life insurance, health insurance, vacations, retirement plans, and child care. Although a common core of benefits may be required, you can choose how your remaining benefit dollars are to be allocated for each type of benefit from the total amount promised by the employer. Sometimes you can contribute more for additional coverage. Also known as a Cafeteria plan or IRS 125 Plan.
Flexible Spending Account (FSA): Accounts offered and administered by employers that allow employees to set aside, out of their paycheck, pretax dollars to pay for the employee’s share of insurance premiums or medical expenses not covered by the employer’s health plan. The employer may also make contributions to a FSA. Typically, benefits or cash must be used within the given benefit year or the employee loses the money. Flexible spending accounts can also be provided to cover childcare expenses, but those accounts must be established separately from medical FSAs.
Formulary A list of drugs your insurance plan covers. May include how much you pay for each drug. If the plan categorizes drugs into different groups requiring different co-pays – also known as tiers – then the formulary may list drugs by these tiers. Formularies may include both generic drugs and brand-name drugs.
Fully Insured Job-based Plan: A plan in which the employer contracts with another organization to assume financial responsibility for the enrollees’ medical claims and for all incurred administrative costs.
Grandfathered Health Plan: As defined in the Affordable Care Act, a group health plan that was created—or an individual health insurance policy that was purchased—on or before March 23, 2010. Grandfathered plans are exempt from many changes required under the Affordable Care Act.
Plans or policies may lose their grandfathered status if they make certain significant changes that reduce benefits or increase costs to consumers. A health plan must disclose in its plan materials whether it considers itself to be a grandfathered plan and must also advise consumers how to contact the U.S. Department of Labor or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services with questions. Also see “New Plan” below.
Guaranteed Issue: A requirement that health plans must permit you to enroll regardless of health status, age, gender, or other factors that might predict the use of health services. Except in some states, guaranteed issue doesn’t limit how much you can be charged if you enroll.
Guaranteed Renewal: A requirement that your health insurance issuer must offer to renew your policy as long as you continue to pay premiums. Except in some states, guaranteed renewal doesn’t limit how much you can be charged if you renew your coverage.
Home and Community-based Services (HCBS): Services and support provided by most state Medicaid programs in your home or community that gives help with such daily tasks as bathing or dressing. Covered when provided by care workers or, if your state permits it, by your family.
Healthcare Workforce Development: The use of incentives and recruiting to encourage people to enter into health care professions such as primary care and to encourage providers to practice in underserved areas.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA): A 1996 federal act that eliminated discrimination by health insurers for those with preexisting medical conditions. Example: when leaving a group policy, patients cannot be denied coverage in other group policies based on a preexisting medical condition. In order to qualify for HIPPA, you must meet the following two conditions: (1) you have had 18 months of consecutive, continuous prior health coverage, and (2) you must get new coverage with another group medical plan within 63 days. Many insurance plans offer open-enrollment periods when anyone can join, regardless of preexisting conditions.
Health Status: Refers to your medical conditions (both physical and mental health), claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, genetic information, evidence of insurability, and disability.
HIPAA Eligible Individual: It stands for Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. Your status once you have had 18 months of continuous creditable health coverage. To be HIPAA eligible, at least the last day of your creditable coverage must have been under a group health plan; you also must have used up any COBRA or state continuation coverage for which you are eligible; you must not be eligible for Medicare or Medicaid; you must not have other health insurance; and you must apply for individual health insurance within 63 days of losing your prior creditable coverage. When you’re buying individual health insurance, HIPAA eligibility gives you greater protections than you would otherwise have under state law.
Home Health Care: Health care services and supplies in your home that a doctor approves under a plan of care established by your doctor.
Hospital Readmission: A return by a patient to the hospital following discharge for the same or related care within 30, 60 or 90 days. Hospital readmissions are often used in part to measure the quality of hospital care, since it can mean that follow-up care wasn’t properly organized, or that a patient wasn’t fully treated before discharge.
Individual Health Insurance Policy: Policies for people who aren’t connected to job-based coverage. Individual health insurance policies are regulated under state law. Note that the phrase “individual policies” when used in this way – policies that are unconnected to employment – can be used for policies that cover a single person or multiple people (families, mother and dependent child, husband and wife, etc.).
Individual Responsibility: Under the Affordable Care Act, starting in 2014, you must be enrolled in a health insurance plan that meets basic minimum standards. If you aren’t, you may be required to pay a penalty. Exempt from this are people with very low income for whom coverage is unaffordable, or for other reasons, including religious beliefs.
In- Network Provider: A physician, certified nurse midwife, hospital, skilled nursing facility, home health care agency, or any other duly licensed or certified institution or health professional under contract with your insurance provider.
Insurance Co-Op: A non-profit entity in which the same people who own the company are insured by the company. Cooperatives can be formed at a national, state or local level, and can include doctors, hospitals and businesses as member-owners.
Job-based Health Plan: Coverage that is offered to an employee (and often his or her family) by an employer.
Lifetime Limit: A cap on the total lifetime benefits you may get from your insurance policy. An insurance company may impose a total lifetime dollar limit on benefits (like $1 million) or limit specific benefits (like a $200,000 lifetime cap on organ transplants or one gastric bypass per lifetime) or a combination of the two. After a lifetime limit is reached, the insurance plan will no longer pay for covered services. By September 23, 2011, the majority of policies should not have lifetime limits on essential health benefits.
Long-Term Care: Medical and non-medical services provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living such as dressing or bathing. Long-term supports and services can be provided at home, in the community, in assisted living or in nursing homes. Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age. Medicare and most health insurance plans don’t pay for long-term care.
Managed care provisions: Features within health plans that provide insurers with a way to manage the cost, use and quality of health care services received by group members. Examples of managed care provisions include:
 Preadmission certification - Authorization for hospital admission given by a health care provider to a group member prior to hospitalization. Failure to obtain a preadmission certification in non-emergency situations reduces or eliminates the health care provider’s obligation to pay for services rendered.
 Utilization review - The process of reviewing the appropriateness and quality of care provided to patients. Utilization review may take place before, during, or after the services are rendered.
 Preadmission testing - Requirement designed to encourage patients to obtain necessary diagnostic services on an outpatient basis prior to non-emergency hospital admission. The testing is designed to reduce the length of a hospital stay.
Non-emergency weekend admission restriction - A requirement that imposes limits on reimbursement to patients for non-emergency weekend hospital admissions.
Second surgical opinion - A cost-management strategy that encourages or requires patients to obtain the opinion of another doctor after a physician has recommended that a non-emergency or elective surgery be performed. Programs may be voluntary or mandatory in that reimbursement is reduced or denied if the participant does not obtain the second opinion. Plans usually require that such opinions be obtained from board-certified specialists with no personal or financial interest in the outcome.
Medical Loss Ratio (MLR): A financial measurement used in the Affordable Care Act to encourage health plans to provide value to enrollees. Example: If an insurer uses 80 cents of every premium dollar to pay its customers’ medical claims and activities that improve the quality of care, the company has a medical loss ratio of 80%. This indicates that the insurer is using the remaining 20 cents of each premium dollar to pay overhead expenses, including salaries, administrative costs, and agent commissions. The Affordable Care Act sets minimum medical loss ratios for different markets, as do some state laws.
Medically Necessary: Services or supplies that are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your health condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice.
Medical Underwriting: A process used by insurance companies that uses your health status when you’re applying for health insurance coverage to determine whether to offer you coverage, at what price, and with what exclusions or limits.
Minimum Essential Coverage: The type of coverage an individual needs to have to meet the individual responsibility requirement under the Affordable Care Act. This includes individual market policies, job-based coverage, Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, TRICARE and certain other coverage.
New Plan: As referenced in the Affordable Care Act, a health plan that is not grandfathered and therefore subject to all of the reforms in the Affordable Care Act. In the individual health insurance market, a plan that your family is purchasing for the first time. In the group health insurance market, a plan that your employer is offering for the first time. New employees and new family members may be added to existing grandfathered group plans – so a plan that is new to you and your family may still be a grandfathered plan.
In both the individual and group markets, a plan that loses its grandfathered status will be considered a new plan. This happens when it makes significant changes to the plan, such as reducing benefits or increasing cost-sharing for enrollees. Also see “Grandfathered Plan” above.
Nondiscrimination: A requirement that job-based insurance not discriminate based on health status by denying or restricting health coverage, or charging more. Job-based plans can restrict coverage based on other factors such as part-time employment that aren’t related to health status.
Open Enrollment Period: The period of time set up to allow you to choose from available plans, usually once a year.
Out-of-Network Providers: A duly licensed or certified institution or health professional not under contract with your insurance provider.
Out-of-Pocket Costs: Your expenses for medical care that aren’t reimbursed by insurance. Out-of-pocket costs include deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments for covered services plus all costs for services that aren’t covered.
Out-of-Pocket Limit (OOP): The maximum amount you will be required to pay for covered services in a year. Generally, this includes the deductible, coinsurance, and copayments (varies from plan to plan). Example: In some plans the out-of-pocket limit doesn’t include cost sharing for all services, such as prescription drugs. Plans may have different out-of-pocket limits for different services. In Medicaid and CHIP, the limit includes premiums. Additionally, many plans do not have out-of-pocket limits.
Plan Year: A 12-month period of benefits coverage under a group health plan. This 12-month period might be different than the calendar year.
Policy Year: A 12-month period of benefits coverage under an individual health insurance plan. This 12-month period might be different than the calendar year.
Pre-Existing Condition (Job-based Coverage): Any condition (either physical or mental) including a disability for which medical advice, diagnosis, care, or treatment was recommended or received within the 6-month period (the 6 month period is applicable to ERISA plans but may differ from state to state for small businesses, check your policy) ending on your enrollment date in a health insurance plan. Genetic information, without a diagnosis of a disease or a condition, cannot be treated as a pre-existing condition. Pregnancy cannot be considered a pre-existing condition and newborns, newly adopted children and children placed for adoption who are enrolled within 30 days cannot be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions. This term is defined under state law and varies significantly by state.
Pre-existing Condition Exclusion Period (Job-based Coverage)*: The time period during which a health plan won’t pay for care relating to a pre-existing condition. This cannot exceed 12 months for a regular enrollee or 18 months for a late-enrollee.
Pre-existing Condition Exclusion Period (Individual Policy): The time period during which an individual policy won’t pay for care relating to a pre-existing condition. Conditions may be excluded permanently (known as an exclusionary rider). Rules on pre-existing condition exclusion periods in individual policies vary widely by state.
Pre-existing conditions exclusions for children under age 19 are prohibited for plan years effective after September 23, 2010 and will be prohibited for adults for plan years effective after January 1, 2014.
Premium: A monthly payment you make to your insurer to get and keep insurance coverage. Premiums can be paid by employers, unions, employees or individuals or shared among different payers.
Preventive Services: Routine health care that includes screenings, check-ups, and patient counseling to prevent illnesses, disease, or other health problems.
Primary Care: Health services that cover a range of prevention, wellness, and treatment for common illnesses. Primary care providers include doctors, nurses, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants.
They often maintain long-term relationships with you and advise and treat you on a range of health-related issues. They may also coordinate your care with specialists.
Qualified Health Plan: Under the Affordable Care Act, starting in 2014, an insurance plan that is certified by an Exchange, provides essential health benefits, follows established limits on cost-sharing (like deductibles, copayments, and out-of-pocket maximum amounts), and meets other requirements.
A qualified health plan will have a certification by each Exchange in which it is sold.
Qualifying Event: Any event or occurrence such as death, termination of employment, divorce, or a terminal illness that changes an employee's eligibility status and permits an acceleration or continuation of benefits or coverage under a group health plan. The term is most frequently used in reference to COBRA eligibility
Rate Review: A process that allows state insurance departments to review rate increases before insurance companies can apply them to you.
Reinsurance: A reimbursement system that protects insurers from very high claims. It usually involves a third party paying part of an insurance company’s claims once they pass a certain amount.
Reinsurance is a way to stabilize an insurance market and make coverage more available and affordable.
Rescission: The retroactive cancellation of a health insurance policy. Insurance companies will sometimes retroactively cancel your entire policy if you made a mistake on your initial application when you buy an individual market insurance policy. Under the Affordable Care Act, rescission is illegal except in cases of fraud or intentional misrepresentation of material fact as prohibited by the terms of the plan or coverage.
Rider (exclusionary rider): An amendment to an insurance policy. Some riders add coverage while other riders exclude coverage (known as exclusionary rider). Example: You buy a maternity rider to add coverage for pregnancy to your policy. An exclusionary rider is an amendment permitted in individual policies that permanently excludes coverage for a health condition, body part, or body system (such as a certain disease state or disability). Beginning in September 2010, exclusionary riders cannot be applied to coverage for children. Starting in 2014, no exclusionary riders will be permitted in any health insurance.
Risk Adjustment: A statistical process that takes into account the underlying health status and health spending of the enrollees in an insurance plan when looking at their health care outcomes or health care costs.
Self-Insured Plan: Type of plan usually present in larger companies where the employer itself collects premiums from enrollees and takes on the responsibility of paying employees’ and dependents’ medical
claims. These employers can contract for insurance services such as enrollment, claims processing, and provider networks with a third party administrator, or they can be self-administered.
Skilled Nursing Facility Care: Skilled nursing care and rehabilitation services provided on a continuous, daily basis, in a skilled nursing facility. Example: Physical therapy or intravenous injections that can only be given by a registered nurse or doctor.
Special Enrollment Period: A time outside of the open enrollment period during which you and your family have a right to sign up for job-based health coverage. Job-based plans must provide a special enrollment period of 30 days following certain life events that involve a change in family status (such as marriage or birth of a child) or loss of other job-based health coverage.
Special Health Care Need: The health care and related needs of children who have chronic physical, developmental, behavioral or emotional conditions. Such needs are of a type or amount beyond that required by children generally.
State Continuation Coverage: A state-based requirement similar to COBRA that applies to group health insurance policies of employers with fewer than 20 employees. In some states, state continuation coverage rules also apply to larger group insurance policies and add to COBRA protections. Example: in some states, if you’re leaving a job-based plan, you must be allowed to continue your coverage until you reach the age of Medicare eligibility.
Third party administrator (TPA): An individual or firm hired by an employer to handle claims processing, pay providers, and manage other functions related to the operation of health insurance. The TPA is not the policyholder or the insurer. The TPA may often be a company you associate with health insurance, such as Aetna or Blue Cross, but in this role they are not the actual insurer but are simply managing the plan on behalf of the employer.
Uncompensated Care: Health care or services provided by hospitals or health care providers that don’t get reimbursed. Often uncompensated care arises when people don’t have insurance and cannot afford to pay the cost of care.
Usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR) charges: A healthcare provider’s usual fee for a service that does not exceed the customary fee in that geographic area, and is reasonable based on the circumstances. Instead of UCR charges, PPO plans often operate based on a negotiated (fixed) schedule of fees that recognize charges for covered services up to a negotiated fixed dollar amount. Conventional indemnity plans typically operate based on UCR charges.
Waiting Period (Job-based coverage): The time that must pass before coverage can become effective for an employee or dependent, who is otherwise eligible for coverage under a job-based health plan. Applies to all new employees, and is not based on health status. This is different than a pre-existing condition exclusion period, which is applied to individual employees and is based on health status.
Well-baby/Well-child Visits: Routine doctor visits for comprehensive preventive health services that occur when a baby is young and annual visits until a child reaches age 21. Services include physical exam and measurements, vision and hearing screening, and oral health risk assessments.
Wellness Programs: A program intended to improve and promote health and fitness that’s usually offered through the work place, although insurance plans can offer them directly to their enrollees. The program allows your employer or plan to offer you premium discounts, cash rewards, gym memberships, and other incentives to participate. Examples: programs to help you stop smoking, diabetes management programs, weight loss programs, and preventative health screenings.
Catastrophic Plan: A healthcare plan that only covers certain types of expensive care, like hospitalizations. May also include plans that have a high deductible, so that your plan begins to pay only after you’ve first paid up to a certain amount for covered services.
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP): Insurance program jointly funded by state and federal government that provides health insurance to low-income children and, in some states, pregnant women in families who earn too much income to qualify for Medicaid but cannot afford to purchase private health insurance coverage.
Exclusive Provider Organization (EPO) Plan: A managed care plan in which services are covered only if you go to doctors, specialists, or hospitals in the plan’s network (except in an emergency).
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO): An insurance plan that usually limits coverage to care from doctors who work for or contract with the HMO. Generally won’t cover out-of-network care except in an emergency, and may require you to live or work in its service area to be eligible for coverage. HMOs often provide integrated care and focus on prevention and wellness.
Health Savings Account (HSA): A medical savings account available to taxpayers who are enrolled in a High Deductible Health Plan. The funds contributed to the account aren’t subject to federal income tax at the time of deposit. Funds must be used to pay for qualified medical expenses. Unlike a Flexible Spending Account (FSA), funds roll over year to year if you don’t spend them.
High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP): A plan that features higher deductibles than traditional insurance plans. HDHPs can be combined with a health savings account or a health reimbursement arrangement to allow you to pay for qualified out-of-pocket medical expenses on a pre-tax basis.
High Risk Pool Plan (State): Safety net plan that provides coverage if you have been locked out of the individual insurance market because of a pre-existing condition. May also offer coverage if you’re HIPAA eligible or meet other requirements. High-risk pool plans offer health insurance coverage that is subsidized by a state government. Typically, your premium is up to twice as much as you would pay for individual coverage if you were healthy. Not all states offer high risk pools, and those that do have distinct rules in terms of cost, eligibility, and benefits.
Managed care plan: A plan that generally provides comprehensive health services to its’ members, and offers financial incentives for patients to use the providers who belong to the plan. Examples include: health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), exclusive provider organizations (EPOs), and point of service plans (POSs).
Medicaid: A state-administered health insurance program for low-income families and children, pregnant women, the elderly, people with disabilities, and in some states, other adults. The federal government provides a portion of the funding and sets guidelines. States also have choices in how they design their program, so Medicaid programs and eligibility vary state by state and may have a different name in your state.
Medicare: A federal health insurance program for people who are age 65 or older and certain younger people with disabilities. It also covers people with End-Stage Renal Disease.
Medicare Part A: Hospital insurance that helps cover inpatient care in hospitals, skilled nursing facility, hospice, and home care.
Medicare Part B: Medical coverage that helps to cover medically-necessary services like doctors' services, outpatient care, home health services, and other medical services. Part B also covers some preventive services.
Medicare Advantage (Medicare Part C): A type of Medicare health plan offered by a private company that contracts with Medicare to provide you with all your Medicare Part A and Part B benefits. Medicare Advantage Plans include Health Maintenance Organizations, Preferred Provider Organizations, Private Fee-for-Service Plans, Special Needs Plans, and Medicare Medical Savings Account Plans. If you’re enrolled in a Medicare Advantage Plan, Medicare services are covered through the plan and aren’t paid for under Original Medicare. Most Medicare Advantage Plans offer prescription drug coverage.
Medicare Part D: A program that helps pay for prescription drugs for people with Medicare who join a plan that includes Medicare prescription drug coverage. There are two ways to get Medicare prescription drug coverage: through a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan or a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes drug coverage. These plans are offered by insurance companies and other private companies approved by Medicare.
Point-of-Service Plan (POS) Plan: A type of plan in which you pay less if you use doctors, hospitals, and other health care providers that belong to the plan’s network. POS plans may also require you to get a referral from your primary care doctor in order to see a specialist.
Pre-existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP): A new program that will provide a health coverage option if you have been uninsured for at least six months, have a pre-existing condition, and have been denied coverage (or offered insurance without coverage of the pre-existing condition) by a private insurance company. Provides coverage until 2014 when you will have access to affordable health insurance choices through an Exchange, and you can no longer be discriminated against based on a pre-existing condition. Every state has a PCIP program; in some states it is operated by the state while in others it is operated by the federal government.
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO): A type of health plan that contracts with medical providers, such as hospitals and doctors, to create a network of participating providers. You pay less if you use providers that belong to the plan’s network. You can use doctors, hospitals, and providers outside of the network for an additional cost.
Accountable Care Organization (ACO) – These organizations coordinate and provide the full range of health care services for you. The ACA provides incentives for providers who join together to form such organizations and who agree to be accountable for the quality, cost, and overall care of their patients. Actuarial Justification – The demonstration by an issuer that the premiums collected are reasonable, given the benefits collected under the plan or that the distribution of premiums among policyholders are proportional to the distribution of their expected costs, subject to limitations of state and federal law. ACA requires insurers to publicly disclose the actuarial justifications behind unreasonable premium increases. Adjusted Community Rating – A way of pricing insurance where premiums are not based upon a policyholder’s health status, but may be based upon other factors, such as age and geographic location. The ACA requires the use of adjusted community rating, with maximum variation for age of 3:1 and for tobacco use of 1.5:1. Affordable Care Act (ACA) (Public Law 111-148) – The ACA was implemented on March 23, 2010 and is intended to increase access to health care for more Americans, and includes many changes that impact the commercial health insurance market, Medicare and Medicaid. ACA is also referred to as the “health reform act” or “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act” (PPACA). Annual Benefit Limit – The maximum amount your plan will pay in a calendar year. Balance Billing – Balance billing occurs when a provider bills you for the difference between his charge and the allowed amount. For example, if the provider’s charge is $100 and the allowed amount is $70, the provider may bill your for the remaining $30. A preferred provider may not balance bill you. Benefit Package – The set of health services, such as physician visits, hospitalizations, and prescription drugs, which are covered by your health plan. Catastrophic Coverage – A coverage option with a limited benefit plan design accompanied by a high Deductible. The plan design is intended to protect primarily against the cost for unforeseen and expensive illnesses or injuries. These plans are attractive to young adults in relatively good health. Co-insurance – Your share of the costs of a covered health care service, calculated as a percent (for example, 20%) of the allowed amount for the service. You pay co-insurance plus any deductibles you owe. For example, if the health insurance or plan’s allowed amount for an office visit is $100 and you have met your deductible, your co-insurance payment of 20% would be $20. The health insurance or plan pays the rest of the allowed amount. Community Living Assistance Services and Supports (CLASS) Program – The CLASS program establishes a national voluntary long-term care insurance program for the purchase of non-medical services and support necessary for enrollees who have paid premiums into the program and become eligible (due to disability or chronic illnesses). Enrollees would receive benefits that help pay for assistance in the home or in a facility in future years. Enrollment begins January 1, 2011 (targeting working adults who can make voluntary premium contributions through payroll deductions or directly). The first benefits will be paid out to enrollees in 2016. Community Rating – A method of pricing health plans, where all insureds are charged the same premium, regardless of health status, age or other factors. "Adjusted community rating" generally refers to a method where health issuers may vary premiums based on specified demographic characteristics (e.g. age, gender, location), but cannot vary premiums based on the health status or claims history of insureds. Comparative Effectiveness Research – Research that is federally sponsored to compare existing health care interventions to determine which works best for certain patients and which pose the greatest benefits and harms. The research also aims to improve the quality of care and to control costs. Co-Op Plan – A health plan that will be sold by member-owned and operated non-profit organizations through Exchanges open in 2014. ACA provides grants and loans to help Co-Op plans enter the marketplace. Co-payment – A fixed amount (for example, $15) you pay for a covered health care service, usually when you receive the service. The amount can vary by the type of covered health care service. Cost Sharing – You may be required to pay a portion of the costs of your care. Examples of these costs include Co-payments, Co-insurance and annual Deductibles. The ACA provides reduced cost sharing to eligible individuals and families based upon income. Deductible – The amount you owe for covered health care services before your health plan begins to pay. For example, if your deductible is $1,000, your plan won’t pay anything until you’ve met your $1,000 deductible for covered health care services subject to the deductible. The deductible may not apply to all services. Beginning in 2014, deductibles for small group health plans will be limited to $2,000 for individual policies and $4,000 for family policies. Dual Eligibles – An individual who is eligible for Medicare and for some Medicaid benefits. Employer Mandate – Beginning in 2014, employers meeting size or revenue thresholds will be required to offer minimum essential health benefit packages or pay a set portion of the cost of those benefits for use in the Exchanges. Episode of Care – Refers to all the health services related to the treatment of a condition. For acute conditions (such as a concussion or a broken bone), the episode includes all treatment and services from the onset to resolution. For chronic conditions (such as diabetes), the episode refers to all services and treatments received over a given period of time. Some payment reform proposals involve basing provider payment on episodes of care instead of a Fee-for-Service basis. Essential Health Benefits – General categories of benefits as defined by the ACA that must be included in a qualified health plan, effective January 1, 2014. Exchange or Health Insurance Exchange – The ACA requires each state to create a Health Benefit Exchange (competitive insurance marketplace), where individuals and small employers can shop for health plans. Exchanges will assist individuals and small businesses in comparing and purchasing qualified health plans. If a state decides not to establish and Exchange, the federal government will establish an Exchange in that state. External Review – The ACA requires all health plans (except Grandfathered plans) to provide an external review appeal process. Federal Poverty Level (FPL) – The FPL for 2011 is set at $22,350 (total yearly income) for a family of four. Fee-for-Service – A traditional method of paying for medical services where doctors and hospitals are paid a fee for each service they provide. Flexible Spending Account (FSA) – A tax-exempt plan used to pay for medical expenses not paid for by insurance, such as deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. ACA limits over-the-counter item reimbursements only to those purchased with a doctor’s prescription. Grandfathered Plan – A health plan that was in existence on the March 23, 2010, ACA effective date.
Group Health Plan – Health insurance that is offered by a plan sponsor, typically an employer, on behalf of its employees. Guaranteed Issue – Beginning in 2014, the ACA requires issuers to offer coverage to all non-Grandfathered plans, without regard to the following: 
pre-existing conditions; health status;  medical condition; claims experience; receipt of health care; or medical history. Guaranteed Renewability - Issuers must renew coverage or continue it in force at the option of the plan sponsor or the individual.
Health Insurance Issuer (Issuer) - Health insurance issuer means an insurance company, insurance service, or insurance organization (including a health maintenance organization) which is licensed to engage in the business of insurance in Alabama and which is subject to Alabama law. Issuers may also be referred to as carriers, insurance companies, or insurers. Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) – A health plan that provides coverage through a network of hospitals, physicians and other health care providers. HMOs typically require the selection of a primary care physician who is responsible for managing and coordinating all health care. Usually, referrals to specialist physicians are required, and the HMO pays only for care provided by an in-network provider. Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) – A tax-exempt account that can be used to pay for qualified health expenses. HRAs are usually paired with a high-Deductible health plan and are funded solely by employer contributions. Health Savings Account (HSA) – A tax-exempt savings account that can be used to pay for qualified medical expenses. Individuals can obtain HSAs from most financial institutions, or through their employer. Both employers and employees can contribute to the plan. To open an HSA, an individual must have health coverage under an HSA-qualified high-Deductible health plan. High-Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) – These health insurance plans have higher Deductibles and lower premiums than traditional insurance plans. In 2011 and 2012, an HSA qualifying HDHP must have a deductible of at least $1,200 for single coverage and $2,400 for family coverage. The plan must also limit the total amount of out-of-pocket cost sharing for covered benefits.
For 2011 these amounts are $5,950 for single coverage and $11,900 for family coverage. For 2012 these amounts are $6,050 for single coverage and $12,100 for family coverage. High-Risk Pool (Pre-existing Condition Insurance Plan)(PCIP) – The ACA expands upon the current state-based high-risk pool system. The ACA requires the government to establish or issue contracts to establish a temporary PCIP (through 2013) to provide coverage for eligible individuals with pre-existing conditions by appropriating $5 billion to subsidize premiums. Eligibility is limited to individuals who have been uninsured for at least six months and have certain pre-existing conditions. For details see https://www.pcip.gov. Individual Mandate – The ACA requires that most individuals obtain minimum essential coverage or pay a penalty beginning in 2014. Exemptions to this requirement include, but are not limited to, religious objections, individuals with incomes less than 100% of FPL, Indian tribe members, and hardship waivers. Internal Claims Appeal – The ACA requires all non-grandfathered health plans to conduct an internal review of an adverse claim determination at the request of the patient or the patient’s representative. This process must comply with the Department of Labor’s claims and appeals procedures. Interstate Compact – The ACA provides guidelines for states to enter into interstate compact agreements to allow health plans to be sold in multiple states. Lifetime Limits – The ACA prohibits a health plan from establishing lifetime dollar limits on "essential health benefits" (except for grandfathered individual plans). Long-Term Care – Services for one or more necessary or medically necessary diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance, or personal care services, provided in a setting other than an acute care unit of a hospital. Medicaid (Title XIX of the Social Security Act) – A federal and state funded program that provides medical assistance for certain individuals and families with low income and resources. The ACA expands Medicaid eligibility to non-Medicare eligible individuals with incomes up to 133% of the FPL, establishing uniform eligibility for adults and children across all states by 2014. Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) – The minimum percentage of premium dollars a health plan must spend on the reimbursement of certain medical costs. Medicare (Title XVIII of the Social Security Act) – A federal program that provides health care coverage to people age 65 and older, and to those who are under 65 and are permanently disabled or who have a congenital disability; or to those who meet other special criteria such as end-stage renal disease. Eligible individuals can receive coverage for hospital services (Medicare Part A), physician-based medical services (Medicare Part B), coverage through a private insurance plan (Medicare Part C – Medicare Advantage) and prescription drugs (Medicare Part D). Together, Medicare Part A and B are known as Original Medicare. Medicare Part D Donut Hole – A gap in prescription drug coverage under Medicare Part D, where beneficiaries pay 100% of their prescription drug costs after their total drug costs exceed an initial coverage limit and until they qualify for a second tier of coverage. Medicare Supplement (Medigap) Insurance – Private insurance policies that can be purchased to “fill-in the gaps” and pay for certain out-of-pocket expenses (like deductibles and coinsurance) not covered by Original Medicare. Multi-State Plan – A qualified health plan, created by ACA and overseen by the U. S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), which will be available in every state through Exchanges beginning in 2014. Non-Preferred Provider – A health care provider (such as a hospital or doctor) that is not contracted with your health plan. Depending on the health plan’s rules, you may not be covered at all or you may be required to pay a higher portion of the total costs when you use a non-preferred provider. These providers may also be known as out-of-network or non-participating providers. Out-of-Pocket Costs – Health care costs that are not covered by your health plan, such as Deductibles, Co-payments, and Co-insurance. Out-of-pocket costs do not include premium costs. Out-of-Pocket Maximum – An annual limit on the amount of money you are required to pay out-of-pocket for health care costs, excluding premiums. Beginning in 2014, the ACA places restrictions on the maximum amount your health plan can require you to pay. Pre-existing Condition – An illness or medical condition, that existed prior to your applying for a health plan, whether or not any medical advice or treatment was recommended or received. The ACA prohibits health plans from imposing any pre-existing condition exclusions for plan and policy years beginning after September 23, 2010, for children under 19, and for all others beginning in 2014. Preferred Provider – A health care provider (such as a hospital or doctor) that contracts with your health plan. The provider agrees to the plan’s rules and fee schedules and agrees not to balance bill you for amounts beyond the allowed fee schedule. These providers may also be known as in-network providers or participating providers. Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) – A network of preferred providers that contract with a health plan. Plan members typically pay lower costs when they seek care from preferred providers. Premium – The amount you pay, often on a monthly basis, for health insurance. The cost of the premium may be shared between you, your employer or government purchasers. Premium Subsidies – A fixed amount of money, or a designated percentage of the premium cost, that is provided to help people purchase health insurance. The ACA provides premium subsidies to individuals with incomes between 133% and 400% of the FPL level that purchase health plan through the Exchanges beginning in 2014. These are also known as premium tax credits under the ACA. Preventive Care Services – Health care that emphasizes the early detection, prevention, and treatment of disease. Primary Care Provider – A physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine), nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist or physician assistant, as allowed under state law, who provides, coordinates or helps a patient access a range of health care services. Provider – A physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine), health care professional or health care facility licensed, certified or accredited as required by state law. Qualified Health Plan – Health plans that are offered through an Exchange, which have been certified as providing the essential health benefits package as required by the ACA. Rate Review – Review by insurance regulators of a health plan's proposed premium and premium increases. Rates are reviewed to ensure they are sufficient to pay claims, are not unreasonably high in relation to the medical claim costs and the benefits provided, and are not unfairly discriminatory to any individual or group of individuals. Reinsurance – The ACA includes a provision to establish a temporary reinsurance program for years 2014-2016 for issuers that cover high-risk individuals.
Rescission – Rescission is a retroactive cancellation or discontinuance of your coverage due to fraud or intentional misrepresentation of material fact. Risk Adjustment – The process of increasing or reducing payments to health plans to reflect higher or lower than expected spending. Risk adjusting is designed to compensate health plans that enroll a sicker population as a way to discourage plans from selecting only healthier individuals. Risk Corridor – A temporary provision in ACA for years 2014-2016 that requires plans whose costs are lower than anticipated to make payments into a fund that reimburses plans whose costs are higher than expected. Self-Insured Plan – A health plan in which the employer assumes the financial responsibility of health care benefits for its employees. These health plans typically contract with a third-party administrator to provide administrative services for the plan. These plans are also known as self-funded or ERISA plans. Small Business Tax Credit – The ACA provides certain small businesses that offer health plans a tax credit. These tax credits vary with the size, contribution and tax status of the small business. Small Group – The Alabama Department of Insurance regulates small employer health plans with 2-50 employees. Alabama will expand this definition to 1-100 employees in 2016 as required by the ACA. Tax Deduction – The ACA will raise the amount of itemized expenses that a person can deduct from adjusted gross income from the current 7.5% to 10% in 2013 (this increase is waived for individuals 65 and older for tax years 2013-2016). Usual, Customary and Reasonable Charge (UCR) – The amount paid for a medical service in a geographic area based on what providers in the area usually charge for the same or similar medical service. The UCR amount is sometimes used to determine the allowed amount.

In February 2002, the Federal Government’s Interdepartmental Committee on
Employment-based Health Insurance Surveys approved the following set of definitions
for use in Federal surveys collecting employer-based health insurance data. The BLS
National Compensation Survey currently uses these definitions in its data collection
procedures and publications. These definitions will be periodically reviewed and updated
by the Committee.
ASO (Administrative Services Only) – An arrangement in which an employer hires a
third party to deliver administrative services to the employer such as claims processing
and billing; the employer bears the risk for claims.
This is common in self-insured health care plans.
Coinsurance - A form of medical cost sharing in a health insurance plan that requires an
insured person to pay a stated percentage of medical expenses after the deductible
amount, if any, was paid.
Once any deductible amount and coinsurance are paid, the insurer is responsible
for the rest of the reimbursement for covered benefits up to allowed charges: the
individual could also be responsible for any charges in excess of what the insurer
determines to be “usual, customary and reasonable”.
Coinsurance rates may differ if services are received from an approved provider
(i.e., a provider with whom the insurer has a contract or an agreement specifying
payment levels and other contract requirements) or if received by providers not
on the approved list.
In addition to overall coinsurance rates, rates may also differ for different types
of services.
Copayment - A form of medical cost sharing in a health insurance plan that requires an
insured person to pay a fixed dollar amount when a medical service is received. The
insurer is responsible for the rest of the reimbursement.
There may be separate copayments for different services.
Some plans require that a deductible first be met for some specific services
before a copayment applies.
Deductible - A fixed dollar amount during the benefit period - usually a year - that an
insured person pays before the insurer starts to make payments for covered medical
services. Plans may have both per individual and family deductibles.
Some plans may have separate deductibles for specific services. For example, a
plan may have a hospitalization deductible per admission.
Deductibles may differ if services are received from an approved provider or if
received from providers not on the approved list.
Flexible spending accounts or arrangements (FSA) - Accounts offered and
administered by employers that provide a way for employees to set aside, out of their
paycheck, pretax dollars to pay for the employee’s share of insurance premiums or
medical expenses not covered by the employer’s health plan. The employer may also
make contributions to a FSA. Typically, benefits or cash must be used within the given
benefit year or the employee loses the money. Flexible spending accounts can also be
provided to cover childcare expenses, but those accounts must be established separately
from medical FSAs.
Flexible benefits plan (Cafeteria plan) (IRS 125 Plan) – A benefit program under
Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code that offers employees a choice between
permissible taxable benefits, including cash, and nontaxable benefits such as life and
health insurance, vacations, retirement plans and child care. Although a common core of
benefits may be required, the employee can determine how his or her remaining benefit
dollars are to be allocated for each type of benefit from the total amount promised by the
employer. Sometimes employee contributions may be made for additional coverage.
Fully insured plan - A plan where the employer contracts with another organization to
assume financial responsibility for the enrollees’ medical claims and for all incurred
administrative costs.
Gatekeeper - Under some health insurance arrangements, a gatekeeper is responsible for
the administration of the patient’s treatment; the gatekeeper coordinates and authorizes all
medical services, laboratory studies, specialty referrals and hospitalizations.
Group purchasing arrangement – Any of a wide array of arrangements in which two or
more small employers purchase health insurance collectively, often through a common
intermediary who acts on their collective behalf. Such arrangements may go by many
different names, including cooperatives, alliances, or business groups on health. They
differ from one another along a number of dimensions, including governance, functions
and status under federal and State laws. Some are set up or chartered by States while
others are entirely private enterprises. Some centralize more of the purchasing functions
than others, including functions such as risk pooling, price negotiation, choice of health
plans offered to employees, and various administrative tasks. Depending on their
functions, they may be subject to different State and/or federal rules. For example, they
may be regulated as Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements (MEWAs).
Association Health Plans – This term is sometimes used loosely to refer to any
health plan sponsored by an association. It also has a precise definition under the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 that exempts from
certain requirements insurers that sell insurance to small employers only through
association health plans that meet the definition.
Health Care Plans and Systems
Indemnity plan - A type of medical plan that reimburses the patient and/or provider
as expenses are incurred.
Conventional indemnity plan - An indemnity that allows the participant the choice
of any provider without effect on reimbursement. These plans reimburse the patient
and/or provider as expenses are incurred.
Preferred provider organization (PPO) plan - An indemnity plan where coverage
is provided to participants through a network of selected health care providers (such
as hospitals and physicians). The enrollees may go outside the network, but would
incur larger costs in the form of higher deductibles, higher coinsurance rates, or nondiscounted
charges from the providers.
Exclusive provider organization (EPO) plan - A more restrictive type of preferred
provider organization plan under which employees must use providers from the
specified network of physicians and hospitals to receive coverage; there is no
coverage for care received from a non-network provider except in an emergency
situation.
Health maintenance organization (HMO) - A health care system that assumes both
the financial risks associated with providing comprehensive medical services
(insurance and service risk) and the responsibility for health care delivery in a
particular geographic area to HMO members, usually in return for a fixed, prepaid
fee. Financial risk may be shared with the providers participating in the HMO.
Group Model HMO - An HMO that contracts with a single multi-specialty
medical group to provide care to the HMO’s membership. The group practice
may work exclusively with the HMO, or it may provide services to non-HMO
patients as well. The HMO pays the medical group a negotiated, per capita rate,
which the group distributes among its physicians, usually on a salaried basis.
Staff Model HMO - A type of closed-panel HMO (where patients can receive
services only through a limited number of providers) in which physicians are
employees of the HMO. The physicians see patients in the HMO’s own facilities.
Network Model HMO - An HMO model that contracts with multiple physician
groups to provide services to HMO members; may involve large single and multispecialty
groups. The physician groups may provide services to both HMO and
non-HMO plan participants.
Individual Practice Association (IPA) HMO- A type of health care provider
organization composed of a group of independent practicing physicians who
maintain their own offices and band together for the purpose of contracting their
services to HMOs. An IPA may contract with and provide services to both HMO
and non-HMO plan participants.
Point-of-service (POS) plan - A POS plan is an "HMO/PPO" hybrid; sometimes
referred to as an "open-ended" HMO when offered by an HMO. POS plans resemble
HMOs for in-network services. Services received outside of the network are usually
reimbursed in a manner similar to conventional indemnity plans (e.g., provider
reimbursement based on a fee schedule or usual, customary and reasonable charges).
Physician-hospital organization (PHO) - Alliances between physicians and
hospitals to help providers attain market share, improve bargaining power and reduce
administrative costs. These entities sell their services to managed care organizations
or directly to employers.
Managed care plans - Managed care plans generally provide comprehensive health
services to their members, and offer financial incentives for patients to use the providers
who belong to the plan. Examples of managed care plans include:
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs),
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs),
Exclusive provider organizations (EPOs), and
Point of service plans (POSs).
Managed care provisions - Features within health plans that provide insurers with a way
to manage the cost, use and quality of health care services received by group members.
Examples of managed care provisions include:
Preadmission certification - An authorization for hospital admission given by a
health care provider to a group member prior to their hospitalization. Failure to
obtain a preadmission certification in non-emergency situations reduces or
eliminates the health care provider’s obligation to pay for services rendered.
Utilization review - The process of reviewing the appropriateness and quality of
care provided to patients. Utilization review may take place before, during, or
after the services are rendered.
Preadmission testing - A requirement designed to encourage patients to obtain
necessary diagnostic services on an outpatient basis prior to non-emergency
hospital admission. The testing is designed to reduce the length of a hospital
stay.
Non-emergency weekend admission restriction - A requirement that imposes
limits on reimbursement to patients for non-emergency weekend hospital
admissions.
Second surgical opinion - A cost-management strategy that encourages or
requires patients to obtain the opinion of another doctor after a physician has
recommended that a non-emergency or elective surgery be performed. Programs
may be voluntary or mandatory in that reimbursement is reduced or denied if the
participant does not obtain the second opinion. Plans usually require that such
opinions be obtained from board-certified specialists with no personal or
financial interest in the outcome.
Maximum plan dollar limit - The maximum amount payable by the insurer for covered
expenses for the insured and each covered dependent while covered under the health
plan.
Plans can have a yearly and/or a lifetime maximum dollar limit.
The most typical of maximums is a lifetime amount of $1 million per individual.

Maximum out-of-pocket expense - The maximum dollar amount a group member is
required to pay out of pocket during a year. Until this maximum is met, the plan and
group member shares in the cost of covered expenses. After the maximum is reached, the
insurance carrier pays all covered expenses, often up to a lifetime maximum. (See
previous definition.)
Medical savings accounts (MSA) – Savings accounts designated for out-of-pocket
medical expenses. In an MSA, employers and individuals are allowed to contribute to a
savings account on a pre-tax basis and carry over the unused funds at the end of the year.
One major difference between a Flexible Spending Account (FSA) and a Medical
Savings Account (MSA) is the ability under an MSA to carry over the unused funds for
use in a future year, instead of losing unused funds at the end of the year. Most MSAs
allow unused balances and earnings to accumulate. Unlike FSAs, most MSAs are
combined with a high deductible or catastrophic health insurance plan.
Minimum premium plan (MPP) – A plan where the employer and the insurer agree that
the employer will be responsible for paying all claims up to an agreed-upon aggregate
level, with the insurer responsible for the excess. The insurer usually is also responsible
for processing claims and administrative services.
Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangement (MEWA) – MEWA is a technical term
under federal law that encompasses essentially any arrangement not maintained pursuant
to a collective bargaining agreement (other than a State-licensed insurance company or
HMO) that provides health insurance benefits to the employees of two or more private
employers.
Some MEWAs are sponsored by associations that are local, specific to a trade or
industry, and exist for business purposes other than providing health insurance. Such
MEWAs most often are regulated as employee health benefit plans under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), although States generally also retain
the right to regulate them, much the way States regulate insurance companies. They can
be funded through tax-exempt trusts known as Voluntary Employees Beneficiary
Associations (VEBAs) and they can and often do use these trusts to self-insure rather
than to purchase insurance policies.
Other MEWAs are sponsored by Chambers of Commerce or similar organizations of
relatively unrelated employers. These MEWAs are not considered to be health plans
under ERISA. Instead, each participating employer’s plan is regulated separately under
ERISA. States are free to regulate the MEWAs themselves. These MEWAs tend to
serve as vehicles for participating employers to buy insurance policies from Statelicensed
insurance companies or HMOs. They do not tend to self-insure.
Multi-employer health plan – Generally, an employee health benefit plan maintained
pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement that includes employees of two or more
employers. These plans are also known as Taft-Hartley plans or jointly-administered
plans. They are subject to federal but not State law (although States may regulate any
insurance policies that they buy). They often self-insure.
Premium - Agreed upon fees paid for coverage of medical benefits for a defined benefit
period. Premiums can be paid by employers, unions, employees, or shared by both the
insured individual and the plan sponsor.
Premium equivalent - For self-insured plans, the cost per covered employee, or the
amount the firm would expect to reflect the cost of claims paid, administrative costs, and
stop-loss premiums.
Primary care physician (PCP) - A physician who serves as a group member's primary
contact within the health plan. In a managed care plan, the primary care physician
provides basic medical services, coordinates and, if required by the plan, authorizes
referrals to specialists and hospitals.
Reinsurance – The acceptance by one or more insurers, called reinsurers or assuming
companies, of a portion of the risk underwritten by another insurer that has contracted
with an employer for the entire coverage.
Self-insured plan – A plan offered by employers who directly assume the major cost of
health insurance for their employees. Some self-insured plans bear the entire risk. Other
self-insured employers insure against large claims by purchasing stop-loss coverage.
Some self-insured employers contract with insurance carriers or third party administrators
for claims processing and other administrative services; other self-insured plans are selfadministered.
Minimum Premium Plans (MPP) are included in the self-insured health
plan category. All types of plans (Conventional Indemnity, PPO, EPO, HMO, POS, and
PHOs) can be financed on a self-insured basis. Employers may offer both self-insured
and fully insured plans to their employees.
Stop-loss coverage – A form of reinsurance for self-insured employers that limits the
amount the employers will have to pay for each person’s health care (individual limit) or
for the total expenses of the employer (group limit).
Third party administrator (TPA) – An individual or firm hired by an employer to
handle claims processing, pay providers, and manage other functions related to the
operation of health insurance. The TPA is not the policyholder or the insurer.
Types of health care provider arrangements
 Exclusive providers - Enrollees must go to providers associated with the plan for all
non-emergency care in order for the costs to be covered.
 Any providers - Enrollees may go to providers of their choice with no cost incentives
to use a particular subset of providers.
 Mixture of providers - Enrollees may go to any provider but there is a cost incentive
to use a particular subset of providers.
Usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR) charges - Conventional indemnity plans
operate based on usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR) charges. UCR charges mean
that the charge is the provider’s usual fee for a service that does not exceed the customary
fee in that geographic area, and is reasonable based on the circumstances. Instead of
UCR charges, PPO plans often operate based on a negotiated (fixed) schedule of fees that
recognize charges for covered services up to a negotiated fixed dollar amount.

REFERENCE SOURCES
Survey definitions from:
 The National Compensation Survey definitions (BLS),
 The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey definitions (AHRQ), and
 The National Employer Health Insurance Survey definitions (NCHS).
Definitions from other Federal agencies and surveys, such as:
 The Current Population Survey (BLS/Census)
 ERISA-related definitions (from PWBA)
Glossaries and informational papers from websites such as:
 OPM’s Federal Employees Health Benefit Plans (glossary and specific plan booklets),
 Blue Cross / Blue Shield ,
The National Center for Policy Analysis, and
The Health Insurance Association of America.
Publications such as:
 Employee Benefit Plans: A Glossary of Terms, Ninth Edition 1997, Judith A. Sankey
editor, International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans.
"Fundamentals of Employee Benefit Programs, Fourth addition"
"Managed Care Plans and Managed Care Features: Data from the EBS to the NCS",
Cathy A. Baker and Iris S. Díaz, Compensation and Working Conditions, Spring
2001
EBRI Notes Vol. 16, no. 7, July 1995
HIAA Source Book
Personal communications with staff from some of the data sources cited above.

Actuarial justification — The demonstration by an insurer that the premiums collected are reasonable, given the benefits provided under the plan or that the distribution of premiums among policyholders are proportional to the distribution of their expected costs, subject to limitations of state and federal law. PPACA requires insurers to publicly disclose the actuarial justifications behind unreasonable premium increases.
Adjusted community rating — A way of pricing insurance where premiums are not based upon a policyholder's health status, but may be based upon other factors, such as age and geographic location. PPACA requires the use of adjusted community rating, with maximum variation for age of 3:1 and for tobacco use of 1.5:1.
Annual limit — Many health insurance plans place dollar limits upon the claims the insurer will pay over the course of a plan year. PPACA prohibits annual limits for essential benefits for plan years beginning after Sept. 23, 2010.
-B-
Balance billing — When you receive services from a health care provider that does not participate in your insurer's network, the health care provider is not obligated to accept the insurer's payment as payment in full and may bill you for unpaid amount. This is known as “balance billing.”
-C-
CHIP — The Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) provides coverage to low- and moderate-income children. Like Medicaid, it is jointly funded and administered by the states and the federal government. It was originally called the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP).

COBRA coverage — Congress passed the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) health benefit provisions in 1986. COBRA provides certain former employees, retirees, spouses, former spouses and dependent children the right to temporary continuation of health coverage at group rates. The law generally covers health plans maintained by private-sector employers with 20 or more employees, employee organizations, or state or local governments. Many states have “mini-COBRA” laws that apply to the employees of employers with less than 20 employees.
Coinsurance — A percentage of a health care provider's charge for which the patient is financially responsible under the terms of the policy.
Community rating — A way of pricing insurance, where every policyholder pays the same premium, regardless of health status, age or other factors.
Co-Op Plan — A health insurance plan that will be sold by member-owned and operated non-profit organizations through Exchanges when they open in 2014. PPACA provides grants and loans to help Co-Op plans enter the marketplace.
Co-payment — A flat-dollar amount which a patient must pay when visiting a health care provider.
Cost-sharing — Health care provider charges for which a patient is responsible under the terms of a health plan. Common forms of cost-sharing include deductibles, coinsurance and co-payments. Balance-billed charges from out-of-network physicians are not considered cost-sharing. PPACA prohibits total cost-sharing exceed $5,950 for an individual and $11,900 for a family. These amounts will be adjusted annually to reflect the growth of premiums.
Deductible — A dollar amount that a patient must pay for health care services each year before the insurer will begin paying claims under a policy. PPACA limits annual deductibles for small group policies to $2,000 for policies that cover an individual, and $4,000 for other policies. These amounts will be adjusted annually to reflect the growth of premiums.
Disease management — A broad approach to appropriate coordination of the entire disease treatment process that often involves shifting away from more expensive inpatient and acute care to areas such as preventive medicine, patient counseling and education, and outpatient care. The process is intended to reduce health care costs and improve the quality of life for individuals by preventing or minimizing the effects of a disease, usually a chronic condition.
-E-
ERISA — The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) is a comprehensive and complex statute that federalizes the law of employee benefits. ERISA applies to most kinds of employee benefit plans, including plans covering health care benefits, which are called employee welfare benefit plans.
Essential Benefits — PPACA requires all health insurance plans sold after 2014 to include a basic package of benefits including hospitalization, outpatient services, maternity care, prescription drugs, emergency care and preventive services among other benefits. It also places restrictions on the amount of cost-sharing that patients must pay for these services.
Exchange — PPACA creates new “American Health Benefit Exchanges” in each state to assist individuals and small businesses in comparing and purchasing qualified health insurance plans. Exchanges will also determine who qualifies for subsidies and make subsidy payments to insurers on behalf of individuals receiving them. They will also accept applications for other health coverage programs such as Medicaid and CHIP.
External review — The review of a health plan’s determination that a requested or provided health care service or treatment is not or was not medically necessary by a person or entity with no affiliation or connection to the health plan. PPACA requires all health plans to provide an external review process that meets minimum standards.
-F-
Formulary — The list of drugs covered fully or in part by a health plan.
Grandfathered plan — A health plan that an individual was enrolled in prior to March 23, 2010. Grandfathered plans are exempted from most changes required by PPACA. New employees may be added to group plans that are grandfathered, and new family members may be added to all grandfathered plans.
Group health plan — An employee welfare benefit plan that is established or maintained by an employer or by an employee organization (such as a union), or both, that provides medical care for participants or their dependents directly or through insurance, reimbursement or otherwise.
Guaranteed issue — A requirement that health insurers sell a health insurance policy to any person who requests coverage. PPACA requires that all health insurance be sold on a guaranteed-issue basis beginning in 2014.
Guaranteed renewability — A requirement that health insurers renew coverage under a health plan except for failure to pay premium or fraud. HIPAA requires that all health insurance be guaranteed renewable.
-H-
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) — A type of managed care organization (health plan) that provides health care coverage through a network of hospitals, doctors and other health care providers. Typically, the HMO only pays for care that is provided from an in-network provider. Depending on the type of coverage you have, state and federal rules govern disputes between enrolled individuals and the plan.
Health Savings Account (HSA) — The Medicare bill signed by President Bush on Dec. 8, 2003 created HSAs. Individuals covered by a qualified high deductible health plan (HDHP) (and have no other first dollar coverage) are able to open an HSA on a tax preferred basis to save for future qualified medical and retiree health expenses. Additional information about HSAs can be found on the U.S. Treasury Web site: http://www.treas.gov/offices/public-affairs/hsa/.
High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) — A type of health insurance plan that, compared to traditional health insurance plans, requires greater out-of-pocket spending, although premiums may be lower. In 2010, an HSA-qualifying HDHP must have a deductible of at least $1,200 for single coverage and $2,400 for family coverage. The plan must also limit the total amount of out-of-pocket cost-sharing for covered benefits each year to $5,950 for single coverage and $11,900 for families.
High risk pool — A state-subsidized health plan that provides coverage for individuals with pre-existing health care conditions who cannot purchase it in the private market. PPACA creates a temporary federal high risk pool program, which may be administered by the states, to provide coverage to individuals with pre-existing conditions who have been uninsured for at least 6 months.
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) — The federal law enacted in 1996 which eased the “job lock” problem by making it easier for individuals to move from job to job without the risk of being unable to obtain health insurance or having to wait for coverage due to pre-existing medical conditions.
-I-
In-Network provider — A health care provider (such as a hospital or doctor) that is contracted to be part of the network for a managed care organization (such as an HMO or PPO). The provider agrees to the managed care organization’s rules and fee schedules in order to be part of the network and agrees not to balance bill patients for amounts beyond the agreed upon fee.
Individual mandate — A requirement that everyone maintain health insurance coverage. PPACA requires that everyone who can purchase health insurance for less than 8% of their household income do so or pay a tax penalty.
Individual market — The market for health insurance coverage offered to individuals other than in connection with a group health plan. PPACA makes numerous changes to the rules governing insurers in the individual market.
Internal review — The review of the health plan’s determination that a requested or provided health care service or treatment health care service is not or was not medically necessary by an individual(s) associated with the health plan. PPACA requires all plans to conduct an internal review upon request of the patient or the patient’s representative.
Interstate compact — An agreement between two or more states. PPACA provides guidelines for states to enter into interstate compacts to allow health insurance policies to be sold in multiple states.
-J-
Job Lock — The situation where individuals remain in their current job because they have an illness or condition that may make them unable to obtain health insurance coverage if they leave that job. PPACA would eliminate job lock by prohibiting insurers from refusing to cover individuals due to health status.
Lifetime limit — Many health insurance plans place dollar limits upon the claims that the insurer will pay over the course of an individual’s life. PPACA prohibits lifetime limits on benefits beginning with on Sept. 23, 2010.
Limited Benefits Plan — A type of health plan that provides coverage for only certain specified health care services or treatments or provides coverage for health care services or treatments for a certain amount during a specified period.
-M-
Mandated benefit — A requirement in state or federal law that all health insurance policies provide coverage for a specific health care service.
Medicaid — A joint state and federal program that provides health care coverage to eligible categories of low-income individuals. Rules for eligible categories (such as children, pregnant women, people with disabilities, etc), and for income and asset requirements, vary by state. Coverage is generally available to all individuals who meet these state eligibility requirements. Medicaid often pays for long-term care (such as nursing home care). PPACA extends eligibility for Medicaid to all individuals earning up to $29,326 for a family of four.
Medical loss ratio — The percentage of health insurance premiums that are spent by the insurance company on health care services. PPACA requires that large group plans spend 85% of premiums on clinical services and other activities for the quality of care for enrollees. Small group and individual market plans must devote 80% of premiums to these purposes.
Medicare — A federal government program that provides health care coverage for all eligible individuals age 65 or older or under age 65 with a disability, regardless of income or assets. Eligible individuals can receive coverage for hospital services (Medicare Part A), medical services (Medicare Part B), and prescription drugs (Medicare Part D). Together, Medicare Part A and B are known as Original Medicare. Benefits can also be provided through a Medicare Advantage plan (Medicare Part C).
Medicare Advantage — An option Medicare beneficiaries can choose to receive most or all of their Medicare benefits through a private insurance company. Also known as Medicare Part C. Plans contract with the federal government and are required to offer at least the same benefits as original Medicare, but may follow different rules and may offer additional benefits. Unlike original Medicare, enrollees may not be covered at any health care provider that accepts Medicare, and may be required to pay higher costs if they choose an out-of-network provider or one outside of the plan’s service area.
Medicare Supplement (Medigap) Insurance — Private insurance policies that can be purchased to “fill-in the gaps” and pay for certain out-of-pocket expenses (like deductibles and coinsurance) not covered by original Medicare (Part A and Part B).
Multi-state plan — A plan, created by PPACA and overseen by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), that will be available in every state through Exchanges beginning in 2014.
-O-
Open enrollment period — A specified period during which individuals may enroll in a health insurance plan each year. In certain situations, such as if one has had a birth, death or divorce in their family, individuals may be allowed to enroll in a plan outside of the open enrollment period.
Out-of-network provider — A health care provider (such as a hospital or doctor) that is not contracted to be part of a managed care organization’s network (such as an HMO or PPO). Depending on the managed care organization’s rules, an individual may not be covered at all or may be required to pay a higher portion of the total costs when he/she seeks care from an out-of-network provider.
Out-of-pocket limit — An annual limitation on all cost-sharing for which patients are responsible under a health insurance plan. This limit does not apply to premiums, balance-billed charges from out of network health care providers or services that are not covered by the plan. PPACA requires out-of-pocket limits of $5,950 per individual and $11,900 per family, beginning in 2014. These amounts will be adjusted annually to account for the growth of health insurance premiums.
-P-
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) — Legislation (Public Law 111-148) signed by President Obama on March 23, 2010. Commonly referred to as the health reform law.
Pre-existing condition exclusion — The period of time that an individual receives no benefits under a health benefit plan for an illness or medical condition for which an individual received medical advice, diagnosis, care or treatment within a specified period of time prior to the date of enrollment in the health benefit plan. PPACA prohibits pre-existing condition exclusions for all plans beginning January 2014.
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) — A type of managed care organization (health plan) that provides health care coverage through a network of providers. Typically the PPO requires the policyholder to pay higher costs when they seek care from an out-of-network provider. Depending on the type of coverage you have, state and federal rules govern disputes between enrolled individuals and the plan.
Premium — The periodic payment required to keep a policy in force.
Preventive benefits — Covered services that are intended to prevent disease or to identify disease while it is more easily treatable. PPACA requires insurers to provide coverage for preventive benefits without deductibles, co-payments or coinsurance.
-Q-
Qualified health plan — A health insurance policy that is sold through an Exchange. PPACA requires Exchanges to certify that qualified health plans meet minimum standards contained in the law.
-R-
Rate review — Review by insurance regulators of proposed premiums and premium increases. During the rate review process, regulators will examine proposed premiums to ensure that they are sufficient to pay all claims, that they are not unreasonably high in relation to the benefits being provided, and that they are not unfairly discriminatory to any individual or group of individuals.
Reinsurance — Insurance purchased by insurers from other insurers to limit the total loss an insurer would experience in case of a disaster or unexpectedly high claims. PPACA directs states to create temporary reinsurance programs to stabilize their individual markets during the implementation of health reform.
Rescission — The process of voiding a health plan from its inception usually based on the grounds of material misrepresentation or omission on the application for insurance coverage that would have resulted in a different decision by the health insurer with respect to issuing coverage. PPACA prohibits rescissions except in cases of fraud or intentional misrepresentation of a relevant fact.
Risk adjustment — A process through which insurance plans that enroll a disproportionate number of sick individuals are reimbursed for that risk by other plans who enroll a disproportionate number of healthy individuals. PPACA requires states to conduct risk adjustment for all non-grandfathered health insurance plans.
Risk corridor — A temporary provision in PPACA that requires plans whose costs are lower than anticipated to make payments into a fund that reimburses plans whose costs are higher than expected.
Self-insured — Group health plans may be self-insured or fully insured. A plan is self-insured (or self-funded), when the employer assumes the financial risk for providing health care benefits to its employees. A plan is fully insured when all benefits are guaranteed under a contract of insurance that transfers that risk to an insurer.
Small group market — The market for health insurance coverage offered to small businesses – those with between 2 and 50 employees in most states. PPACA will broaden the market to those with between 1 and 100 employees.
Solvency — The ability of a health insurance plan to meet all of its financial obligations. State insurance regulators carefully monitor the solvency of all health insurance plans and require corrective action if a plan’s financial situation becomes hazardous. In extreme circumstances, a state may seize control of a plan that is in danger of insolvency.

Usual, Customary and Reasonable charge (UCR) — The cost associated with a health care service that is consistent with the going rate for identical or similar services within a particular geographic area. Reimbursement for out-of-network providers is often set at a percentage of the usual, customary and reasonable charge, which may differ from what the provider actually charges for a service.
Waiting period — A period of time that an individual must wait either after becoming employed or submitting an application for a health insurance plan before coverage becomes effective and claims may be paid. Premiums are not collected during this period.

active life reserves — Funds held by an insurer to pay future claims incurred by individuals covered by a nongroup policy. In the early years after a block is opened, claims are generally low. Monies put aside during this time are available to pay future claims, helping to moderate future premium increases. See also block of policies.
adjusted community rating — A method of setting premiums or rates under which an insurer divides its policyholders into classes or groups based on demographic and other factors such as age, family composition, and geographic location, and then charges all members of a class or group the same premium. The insurer cannot consider the health status or claims experience of a class or group in developing premium rates. Also known as community rating by class or modified community rating.
administrative services only (ASO) contract — An arrangement in which an employer hires a third party to deliver health care-related administrative services to the employer such as claims processing and billing. The employer bears the financial risk for claims.
adverse selection — The tendency of people who have a greater-than-average likelihood of using services to seek health care coverage to a greater extent than individuals who have an average or less-than-average likelihood of using services. Also known as anti-selection. Adverse selection occurs when less-healthy people disproportionately enroll in a risk pool.
agent — A person who is authorized by a plan or insurer to act on its behalf to negotiate, sell, and service insurance contracts.
anti-selection — See adverse selection.
assuming company — See reinsurance.

balance billing — Charges collected by a provider in excess of a plan’s reimbursement rate for covered services. Balance billing does not include charging or collecting deductibles or co-insurance required by the plan. Balance billing may occur when plan participants use out-of-network providers who have not agreed to the plan’s terms. Many states ban balance billing by in-network providers. See also out-of-network.
blended rating — For groups with limited recorded claims experience or fewer than 500 employees covered, a method of setting premiums based partly on a plan’s “manual rates” and partly on the group’s experience. See also manual rating.
block of policies — A group of enrollees in the same product, the same issue period (for example, three to five years), and perhaps the same region. Insurers’ actions regarding blocks, such as closing or continuing to add to the block, can affect future premiums.
broker — A salesperson who has obtained a state license to sell and service contracts of multiple health plans or insurers, and who is considered to be an agent of the buyer, not of the health plan or insurer.
capitation — A flat, per-covered-individual fee paid to providers to supply all, or nearly all, covered services an individual may need within a specified time frame.
carrier — The insurance company or HMO offering a health plan.
carve-out — An arrangement whereby a plan contracts with another organization to supply specialty health services for members, such as pharmacy benefits or behavioral health care services.
certificate of creditable coverage — A written statement from an individual’s prior insurance company or health plan documenting the length of time the individual was covered and that the coverage met specified requirements.
claim — An itemized statement of health care services and their charges provided by a hospital, physician’s office, or other provider. Claims are submitted to the insurer by either the plan member or the provider for payment.
coinsurance — A method of cost sharing in a health insurance plan that requires the insured to pay a stated percentage of medical expenses after the deductible amount, if any, was paid. Coinsurance percentages may vary for specific types of services and whether they are provided by in-network or out- of- network providers.
community rating — A rating method that sets premiums according to the insurer’s expected costs of providing medical benefits to all enrollees rather than to any sub-group of enrollees. Both low-risk and high-risk groups are factored into community rating, which spreads the expected medical care costs across all enrollees.
community rating by class — See adjusted community rating.
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COCOBRARA) — A 1986 federal law that requires group health plans to allow employees and certain dependents to continue their group coverage at their own expense for a stated period of time, usually 18 or up to 36 months in certain situations, following a qualifying event that causes the loss of group health coverage. Qualifying events include reduced work hours, death or divorce of a covered employee, and termination of employment. COBRA applies to workers in firms with 20 or more employees.
copayment — A method of cost sharing in a health insurance plan that requires the insured to pay a fixed dollar amount when a medical service is received. (Copayment amounts can vary depending on the type of service.)
creditable coverage — The number of months an individual had health insurance without a break in coverage of 63 days or more before his/her current or new coverage became effective. Under HIPAA, creditable coverage must be counted towards any pre-existing condition exclusion in either an individual or group policy. The prior insurance must have provided a minimum level of coverage; benefit policies, such as limited scope dental or vision benefits, do not qualify. See “The Basics: HIPAA Coverage Provisions” at www.nhpf.org/pdfs_basics/Basics_HIPAAAA_03-25-08.pdf for more information.

deductible — A fixed dollar amount during the benefit period, usually a year, that an insured person pays before the insurer starts to make payments for covered medical services. Plans may have both individual and family deductibles. Some services, such as preventive care, may be exempt from the deductible. Some plans may have separate deductibles for specific services such as a hospital admission or pharmacy benefits.
denial — The decision by an insurance company to refuse to issue a policy to an individual applying for individual insurance or to withhold a claim payment or preauthorization for services.

ERIERIERISA — The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (1974) is administered by the U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefits Security Administration. ERISA regulates employer-sponsored pension and insurance plans (self-funded plans) for employees.
elimination period — A period of time after enrolling in a health plan before benefits are payable. Also known as the waiting or qualifying period, policyholders must pay for services during this period.
Ethics in Patient Referrals Act — A 1989 federal law and its amendments, commonly called the Stark law, which prohibit a physician from referring patients to laboratories, radiology services, diagnostic services, physical therapy services, home health services, pharmacies, occupational therapy services, and suppliers of durable medical equipment in which the physician has a financial interest. Certain exceptions are allowed. For example, physicians are able to provide ancillary services such as laboratory, radiology, and physical therapy services in their offices.
exclusions and/or limitations — Conditions or circumstances described in an insurance policy that limit or exclude covered benefits, such as treatment for a condition present before enrolling in a plan or a maximum on the number of services per month or year. These exclusions and limitations must be clearly spelled out in plan documents.
experience rating — A rating method under which an insurer analyzes a group’s prior health care costs by type and calculates the group’s premium partly or completely according to the group’s claims experience.
experimental or investigational medical services — A drug, device, procedure, treatment plan, or other therapy which is currently not within the accepted standards of medical care as determined by an insurer. Plans often do not cover experimental or investigational services; some may be covered if they are received as part of a clinical trial.
explanation of benefits (EOEOB) — An insurance company’s written explanation of a claim’s disposition, showing what they paid and what the insured must pay, if anything.

Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHFEHFEHB) Program — A voluntary health insurance program administered by the Office of Personnel Management for federal employees, retirees, and their dependents and survivors.
fee-for-service payment (FFFFS) – A system in which the insurer will either reimburse (subject to deductibles, copayments, or coinsurance) the insured or pay the provider directly for each covered medical expense after the expense has been incurred.
fee schedule — The fee determined by a plan to be allowable for a procedure or service. Medicare uses the Resource Based Relative Value Schedule (RBRVS) to pay physicians, and private insurers frequently use a version of this schedule.
flexible spending arrangements — Accounts offered and administered by employers that allow employees to set aside, out of their paycheck, pre-tax dollars to pay certain specified expenses including the employee’s share of insurance premiums or medical expenses not covered by the employer’s health plan. Funds must be used within the given benefit period or the employee forfeits the money.
formulary — A list of drugs classified by therapeutic category or disease class, created by a plan. A plan may cover only drugs on its formulary or require higher copayments or coinsurance for non-formulary drugs. Many plans tier their formularies so that consumers pay differing copayments or coinsurance based on the drug’s tier designation of generic, preferred, or non-preferred drugs.
fully insured plan — A plan where the employer contracts with another organization to assume financial responsibility for the enrollees’ medical claims and for all administrative costs, usually for a 12-month period.
group insurance — Health plans offered to a group of individuals by an employer, association, union, or other entity.
group market — A segment of the insurance market that includes groups of two or more individuals that enter into a group contract with an insurer to provide coverage to the members of the group.
guaranteed issue — A requirement that a health insurance policy must be issued to an individual without regard to his/her health status or previous claims experience.
guaranteed renewability — This provision of an insurance policy or law guarantees a policyholder the right to renew his/her policy when the term of coverage expires. The insurer is generally allowed to change the premium rates at renewal.
health maintenance organization (HMOHMOHMO) — An entity that assumes or shares financial risk and assumes responsibility for delivering comprehensive medical services to a population in a particular geographic area, usually in return for a fixed, prepaid fee. While many HMOs remain tightly managed and tightly integrate insurance and the delivery of care, some now allow members to decide at the point of service whether to obtain care outside the HMO’s network, typically with higher cost sharing.
health reimbursement arrangement (HRAHRAHRA) — A non-portable account established by an employer on behalf of an employee which can be used to pay for medical expenses. Only the employer can contribute to a health reimbursement account and unspent balances revert to the employer upon termination of employment. HRAs are used with high-deductible health plans.
health savings account (HSA) — An account established by an employer or an individual that can be used for medical expenses. Contributions to an HSA are excluded from income for tax purposes. Any balance remaining at the end of the year “rolls over” to the next year and is “portable” upon termination of employment. HSAs are used with high-deductible health plans.
high-deductible health plan — A plan with a high deductible (usually over $1000 per individual) and a limit on annual out-of-pocket expenses. Some preventive services may not be subject to the deductible. This type of plan is usually coupled with a health savings account or health reimbursement arrangement (HSA or HRA).
high-risk pool — A state-operated program that offers coverage for individuals who cannot get health insurance in the individual market due to serious illness and who do not qualify for other government programs.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAAHIPAAHIPAAHIPAAHIPAA) — A 1996 federal law that defines certain requirements that employer-sponsored group insurance plans, insurance companies, and managed care organizations must satisfy in order to provide health insurance coverage in the individual and group health care markets. The act also specifies certain protections for people purchasing coverage who have changed jobs, are self-employed, or who have pre-existing medical conditions. See “The Basics: HIPAA Coverage Provisions” at www.nhpf.org/pdfs_basics/Basics_HIPAAAA_03-25-08.pdf for more information.
hold harmless provision — A contract clause that forbids providers from seeking compensation from patients if the health plan fails to compensate providers because of insolvency or for any other reason such as the denial of a claim for covered services.
incurred but not reported claims — Claims for services provided during a particular time period, but that have not yet been reported or submitted to an insurer or plan, so they remain unpaid at a point in time, such as the end of an accounting period.

indemnity insurance — Traditional, fee-for-service health insurance that does not limit where a covered individual can get care. The patient or provider is reimbursed as expenses are incurred.
individual health insurance — Coverage purchased independently (not as part of a group), usually directly from an insurance company or though an agent or broker.
individual market — A segment of the private insurance market that includes policies sold to persons that are not members of a group plan. Also known as the non-group market.
in-network — The use of health care services from physicians, hospitals, and other providers who participate in a health plan’s network. Services provided in-network are subject to the plan’s standard copayment or coinsurance. (See also out-of-network.)
independent Practice Association — A type of health care provider organization composed of a group of independently practicing physicians who maintain their own offices and band together for the purpose of contracting with HMOs and other health plans.
insurance exchanges — An entity that facilitates the purchase of insurance in the individual and small group markets. Exchanges may assume a range of functions including setting standards for health plans to be offered, negotiating/contracting with insurers to establish plan offerings and premiums, marketing the exchange’s services to individuals and/or employers, providing tools and services to help individuals select a plan, enrolling individuals and possibly collecting premiums, and possibly risk-adjusting premiums paid to plans.
investigational medical services — See also experimental.
length of stay — The number of days, counted from the day of admission to the day of discharge, that a plan member is confined to a hospital or other facility.
lifetime maximum benefit — The maximum amount a health plan, or one insurer, will pay in benefits to an insured individual during that individual’s lifetime.
limitations — See also exclusions.
long-term care insurance — Coverage that pays for all or part of the cost of home care services or care in a nursing home or assisted living facility related to a disability.
mandated benefits — Services that, by federal or state law, are required to be covered by health insurance policies.
manual rating — A method of setting premiums or rates in which an insurer uses the insurer’s average cost experience with all groups in a business segment—and sometimes the experience of other health plans—rather than a particular group’s experience to calculate the group’s premium.
maximum lifetime benefit — See lifetime maximum benefit.
McCarran-Ferguson Act — A 1945 federal law that placed the primary responsibility for regulating health insurance companies and HMOs at the state level.
medical loss ratio — The share of premiums charged for an employer or insurer’s covered beneficiaries that is paid for incurred medical claims. Administrative charges and profit are not included in the payments used to calculate this ratio.
medical savings account — A predecessor to HSAs authorized as a demonstration by HIPAA in 1995 and as an option under Medicare by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. About 50,000 MSAs have been opened under HIPAA. They are not available currently under Medicare.
medical underwriting — The evaluation by an insurer of the health status of an individual or group applying for coverage to determine their insurability and the premium to be charged.
medically necessary services — A drug, device, procedure, treatment plan, or other therapy that is covered under an individual’s health insurance policy and that the individual’s doctor, hospital, or other provider has determined appropriate for managing or treating a specific illness or underlying condition.
Medigap insurance policies — Insurance offered by private companies that provides reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses, such as deductibles and coinsurance payments, or benefits for some medical expenses specifically excluded from Medicare coverage. Medigap policies must generally offer one of 12 legislatively defined benefit packages.
Mental Health Parity and Addition Equity Act — A 2008 federal law that, with some exceptions, requires large group health plans that include coverage for mental health or substance use disorders to provide these benefits at parity with the plans’ medical/surgical benefits. Small groups and individual policies are not included. The law prohibits plans from imposing more restrictive cost-sharing requirements or treatment limitations for mental health/substance use benefits than applied to medical/surgical benefits.
modified community rating — See adjusted community rating.
network — A group of physicians, hospitals, and other providers who contract with a particular health care plan to provide services to the plan’s enrollees at negotiated rates.

Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act (NMHPANMHPANMHPANMHPANMHPA) — A 1996 federal law that specifies that, if they provide benefits for hospital stays following childbirth, group health plans and health insurance issuers in the group and individual markets cannot mandate that hospital stays following childbirth be shorter than 48 hours for normal deliveries or 96 hours for cesarean births.
nongroup market — See individual market.
open enrollment — A set time of year when eligible individuals can enroll in health insurance or change from one plan to another. Individuals may also enroll at other times if a qualifying event (for example, marriage, divorce, birth of a child/adoption, or death of a spouse) occurs.
out-of-network — The use of health care services from physicians, hospitals, and other providers who are not members of a health plan’s network. Services provided out-of-network may not be covered or the plan may require a higher copayment or coinsurance. The provider may also balance bill for amounts above a fee schedule. See also in-network.
out-of-pocket maximum — A predetermined amount of money that an individual or family must pay in copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles before the plan will pay 100 percent of the individual’s or family’s health care expenses. With some insurers, only in-network claims qualify for the calculation of this maximum.
pharmacy benefit management (PBM) plan — A specialty service organization that provides pharmacy services under contract to an insurer.
point-of-service (POPOS) plan — A type of health plan that allows plan members to choose, at the time medical services are needed, between a provider within the plan’s network of preferred providers or a provider outside the network. Some HMOs offer a POS option.
pooling — The assignment of individuals or groups to a class to determine premiums for the class. Pooling allows risk to be spread across a defined population.
pre-admission certification — Also called pre-certification review or pre-admission review. Approval by a case manager or other insurance company representative for a person to be admitted to a hospital or inpatient facility prior to admittance.
pre-existing condition — Any illness or health condition for which an individual has received medical advice or treatment during a period prior to obtaining health insurance. HIPAA requires group health care policies of three or more persons cover pre-existing conditions after the individual has been insured for six months, and individual policies cover preexisting conditions after one year. Creditable coverage must be counted toward any pre-existing condition exclusion in either an individual or group policy.
preferred provider organization (PPOPPOPPO) — A type of health plan that delivers care through a group of physicians, hospitals, and other providers who contract with the insurer to deliver medical services to plan participants at discounted rates and/or pursuant to certain utilization protocols. Plan member may be encouraged by their insurer to use “preferred providers” through incentives such as reduced cost-sharing.
premium — An agreed upon fee paid for coverage of medical benefits for a specified period, often a year. Premiums can be paid by employers, unions, employees,
or individuals. Premiums may be shared by both the insured individual and a plan sponsor, such as an employer or union.
primary care physician/provider — Usually a family practice doctor, internist, obstetrician-gynecologist, or pediatrician who is most often the individual’s first point of contact with the health care system, particularly in a managed care plan.
prior authorization — A requirement that in order for a service to be covered for an individual, a physician or other provider must seek and obtain approval from the health plan prior to the service being delivered. Prior authorization may be required for particular tests or procedures, drugs, or referrals to certain specialists.
provider profiling — See resource use profiling.
[ Q ]
qualifying period — See elimination period.
[ R ]
rate bands — State laws can restrict the difference between the lowest and highest premiums that an insurer can charge for the same coverage. The rate bands may limit all factors by which rates vary such as age or gender, or may apply only to specified factors, such as health status or claims experience.
rating — The process of calculating the appropriate premium to charge purchasers, given the degree of risk represented by the individual or group, the expected costs to deliver medical services, and the expected marketability and competitiveness of the plan.
rating factors — Factors such as age, health status, chronic conditions, smoking/alcohol use, gender, industry, and geographic region that are used in determining premiums.
reinsurance — The acceptance by one or more insurers, called reinsurers or assuming companies, of a portion of the risk underwritten by another insurer that has contracted with an employer for the entire coverage. Typically, reinsurers pay when the costs of services for an individual or group exceed a relatively high threshold.
relative value scale — A method used by payers or plans of determining payment levels for physician services. The relative value for each service reflects the expected costs of the resources needed to produce the service relative to the resources needed to produce an index service. To determine the amount the plan will pay the physician for a service, the relative value is multiplied by a factor converting relative values to dollars.
renewal underwriting — The process by which an insurer calculates new insurance rates each year using all the factors that were considered when the contract was issued, and updates the group’s premium using actual claims utilization and any changes in the population covered.
resource use profiling — The collection and analysis of information about the service provision and cost patterns of individual providers. Also called provider profiling.
retrospective review — A type of utilization review that occurs after treatment is completed to assess medical necessity and appropriateness of care and to authorize payment.
risk adjustment — An adjustment of payments to either insurers or providers to reflect the expected costliness of providing insurance or a service to an individual based on the characteristics of the individual, such as their gender and age, the seriousness of the treated conditions, and any other illnesses they may have. Also used to adjust measures of outcome or performance to reflect differences in the expected outcomes of services for individual patients.
[ S ]
self-insured plan — A health plan under which an employer or other group sponsor, rather than an insurance company, is financially responsible for paying plan expenses, including claims made by group plan members. Also know as a self-funded plan. Self-insured plans are subject to ERISA and exempt from state regulation.
standard community rating — See community rating.
Stark law — See the Ethics in Patient Referrals Act.
stop-loss — An insurer pays 100 percent of covered benefit charges once an individual has met deductible and coinsurance requirements and his/her out-of-pocket maximum.
stop-loss insurance — A type of insurance coverage that enables provider organizations or self-insured groups to place a dollar limit on their liabilities for paying claims and requires the insurer issuing the insurance to reimburse the insured organization for claims paid in excess of a specified yearly amount. Similar to reinsurance.
[ T ]
third party administrator (TPATPATPA) — An individual or firm hired by an employer to handle claims processing, pay providers, and manage other functions related to the operation of health insurance. The TPA is not the insurer and does not assume risk.
[ U ]
underwriting — The process of assessing the health and other characteristics of an individual or group to determine their likely utilization of health services or risk.
underwriting requirements — Requirements, sometimes relating to group characteristics or financing measures, such as minimum employer contributions that plans at time impose in order to provide health care coverage to a given group and which are designed to balance a health plan’s knowledge of a proposed group with the ability of the group to voluntarily select against the plan (adverse selection).
usual, customary, and reasonable (UCRUCRUCR) fee — The amount commonly charged for a particular medical service by physicians within a particular geographic region. UCR fees are used by some health insurance companies as the basis for physician reimbursement for out-of-network providers. No longer a common form of payment.
utilization review — An evaluation of the medical necessity and appropriateness of health care services and treatment plans for a given patient. Utilization review may take place before, during, or after the services are rendered.
[ W ]
waiting period — A defined period of time before treatment for a specific condition or conditions will be covered by insurance.
withhold — A percentage of a provider’s payment that is “held back” during a specified period to offset or pay for any services costs exceeding an agreed upon threshold. Any part of the withhold not used for these purposes is distributed to the provider. Not commonly used today. May be used as part of a quality improvement or pay form performance program.
Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act (WHCRAHCRAHCRAHCRA) — A 1998 federal law which generally requires group health plans, both fully insured and self-insured, and individual health insurance policies that offer medical and surgical benefits for mastectomy to provide coverage for reconstructive surgery following mastectomy.

Allowed Amount Maximum amount on which payment is based for covered health care services. This may be called “eligible expense,” “payment allowance" or "negotiated rate." If your provider charges more than the allowed amount, you may have to pay the difference. (See Balance Billing.)
Appeal A request for your health insurer or plan to review a decision or a grievance again.
Balance Billing When a provider bills you for the difference between the provider’s charge and the allowed amount. For example, if the provider’s charge is $100 and the allowed amount is $70, the provider may bill you for the remaining $30. A preferred provider may not balance bill you for covered services.
Co-insurance Your share of the costs of a covered health care service, calculated as a percent (for example, 20%) of the allowed amount for the service. You pay co-insurance plus any deductibles you owe. For example,
if the health insurance or plan’s allowed amount for an office visit is $100 and you’ve met your deductible, your co-insurance payment of 20% would be $20. The health insurance or plan pays the rest of the allowed amount.
Complications of Pregnancy Conditions due to pregnancy, labor and delivery that require medical care to prevent serious harm to the health of the mother or the fetus. Morning sickness and a non-emergency caesarean section aren’t complications of pregnancy.
Co-payment A fixed amount (for example, $15) you pay for a covered health care service, usually when you receive the service. The amount can vary by the type of covered health care service.
Deductible The amount you owe for health care services your health insurance or plan covers before your health insurance or plan begins to pay. For example, if your deductible is $1000, your plan won’t pay anything until you’ve met
your $1000 deductible for covered health care services subject to the deductible. The deductible may not apply to all services.
Durable Medical Equipment (DME) Equipment and supplies ordered by a health care provider for everyday or extended use. Coverage for DME may include: oxygen equipment, wheelchairs, crutches or blood testing strips for diabetics.
Emergency Medical Condition An illness, injury, symptom or condition so serious that a reasonable person would seek care right away to avoid severe harm.
Emergency Medical Transportation Ambulance services for an emergency medical condition.
Emergency Room Care Emergency services you get in an emergency room.
Emergency Services Evaluation of an emergency medical condition and treatment to keep the condition from getting worse.
Excluded Services Health care services that your health insurance or plan doesn’t pay for or cover.
Grievance A complaint that you communicate to your health insurer or plan.
Habilitation Services Health care services that help a person keep, learn or improve skills and functioning for daily living. Examples include therapy for a child who isn’t walking or talking at the expected age. These services may include physical and occupational therapy, speech-language pathology and other services for people with disabilities in a variety of inpatient and/or outpatient settings.
Health Insurance A contract that requires your health insurer to pay some or all of your health care costs in exchange for a premium.
Home Health Care Health care services a person receives at home.
Hospice Services Services to provide comfort and support for persons in the last stages of a terminal illness and their families.
Hospitalization Care in a hospital that requires admission as an inpatient and usually requires an overnight stay. An overnight stay for observation could be outpatient care.
Hospital Outpatient Care Care in a hospital that usually doesn’t require an overnight stay.
In-network Co-insurance The percent (for example, 20%) you pay of the allowed amount for covered health care services to providers who contract with your health insurance or plan. In-network co-insurance usually costs you less than out-of-network co-insurance.
In-network Co-payment A fixed amount (for example, $15) you pay for covered health care services to providers who contract with your health insurance or plan. In-network co-payments usually are less than out-of-network co-payments.
Medically Necessary Health care services or supplies needed to prevent, diagnose or treat an illness, injury, condition, disease or its symptoms and that meet accepted standards of medicine.
Network The facilities, providers and suppliers your health insurer or plan has contracted with to provide health care services.
Non-Preferred Provider A provider who doesn’t have a contract with your health insurer or plan to provide services to you. You’ll pay more to see a non-preferred provider. Check your policy to see if you can go to all providers who have contracted with your health insurance or plan, or if your health insurance or plan has a “tiered” network and you must pay extra to see some providers.
Out-of-network Co-insurance The percent (for example, 40%) you pay of the allowed amount for covered health care services to providers who do not contract with your health insurance or plan. Out-of-network co-insurance usually costs you more than in-network co-insurance.
Out-of-network Co-payment A fixed amount (for example, $30) you pay for covered health care services from providers who do not contract with your health insurance or plan. Out-of-network co-payments usually are more than in-network co-payments.
Out-of-Pocket Limit The most you pay during a policy period (usually a year) before your health insurance or plan begins to pay 100% of the allowed amount. This limit never includes your premium, balance-billed charges or health care your health
insurance or plan doesn’t cover. Some health insurance or plans don’t count all of your co-payments, deductibles, co-insurance payments, out-of-network payments or other expenses toward this limit.
Physician Services Health care services a licensed medical physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine) provides or coordinates.
Plan A benefit your employer, union or other group sponsor provides to you to pay for your health care services.
Preauthorization A decision by your health insurer or plan that a health care service, treatment plan, prescription drug or durable medical equipment is medically necessary. Sometimes called prior authorization, prior approval or precertification. Your health insurance or plan may require preauthorization for certain services before you receive them, except in an emergency. Preauthorization isn’t a promise your health insurance or plan will cover the cost.
Preferred Provider A provider who has a contract with your health insurer or plan to provide services to you at a discount. Check your policy to see if you can see all preferred providers or if your health insurance or plan has a “tiered” network and you must pay extra to see some providers. Your health insurance or plan may have preferred providers who are also “participating” providers. Participating providers also contract with your health insurer or plan, but the discount may not be as great, and you may have to pay more.
Premium The amount that must be paid for your health insurance or plan. You and/or your employer usually pay it monthly, quarterly or yearly.
Prescription Drug Coverage Health insurance or plan that helps pay for prescription drugs and medications.
Prescription Drugs Drugs and medications that by law require a prescription.
Primary Care Physician A physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine) who directly provides or coordinates a range of health care services for a patient.
Primary Care Provider A physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine), nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist or physician assistant, as allowed under state law, who provides, coordinates or helps a patient access a range of health care services.
A physician (M.D. – Medical Doctor or D.O. – Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine), health care professional or health care facility licensed, certified or accredited as required by state law.
Reconstructive Surgery Surgery and follow-up treatment needed to correct or improve a part of the body because of birth defects, accidents, injuries or medical conditions.
Rehabilitation Services Health care services that help a person keep, get back or improve skills and functioning for daily living that have been lost or impaired because a person was sick, hurt or disabled. These services may include physical and occupational therapy, speech-language pathology and psychiatric rehabilitation services in a variety of inpatient and/or outpatient settings.
Skilled Nursing Care Services from licensed nurses in your own home or in a nursing home. Skilled care services are from technicians and therapists in your own home or in a nursing home.
Specialist A physician specialist focuses on a specific area of medicine or a group of patients to diagnose, manage, prevent or treat certain types of symptoms and conditions. A non-physician specialist is a provider who has more training in a specific area of health care.
UCR (Usual, Customary and Reasonable) The amount paid for a medical service in a geographic area based on what providers in the area usually charge for the same or similar medical service. The UCR amount sometimes is used to determine the allowed amount.
Urgent Care Care for an illness, injury or condition serious enough that a reasonable person would seek care right away, but not so severe as to require emergency room care.

Agent: individual who represents a company and is qualified to explain the terms of the policies and to collect payment
Ambulatory Care: a facility that provides a wide range of services which may include preventive care as well as laboratory procedures
Beneficiary: the person receiving the payment for claims. The beneficiary could be the insured himself, the doctor, a hospital, or any person to whom payment is due for claims filed.
Benefit: amount an insurance company will pay if you file a claim
Claim: the document created either electronically or in print that tells the company you have had a covered injury or illness
COBRA: a federal law which allows you to retain your group coverage on an individual basis for a limited time period after losing your group coverage
Co-insurance: a percentage of the medical bill that you must pay, such as 20% of the approved amount. Your insurance pays 80% of the approved amount and any amount not approved has to be discounted. Different companies have different co-insurance arrangements.
Contest: to object to a company's decision to deny or pay less on a claim than the client believes to be covered
Copayment: a flat amount that you pay when you go to a doctor or hospital. Does not apply until after you have paid your deductible Covered expenses: hospital, physician, outpatient or any other type of care for which your company will pay providing it is not for a condition expressly excluded.
Covered person: the person for whom the policy will pay benefits Deductible: the portion of a medical bill you have to pay before your insurance starts paying. A higher deductible results in a lower premium.
Effective Date: the date after which the policy will pay for claims
EOB: explanation of benefits form sent to you after a claim has been filed. It will tell you how much the insurance will pay and what you will still owe the caregiver
Exclusions: conditions for which your company will not pay
Formulary: a list of drugs included in the drug coverage portion of your insurance plan. You usually have to pay a copayment for each medication.
Generic: a medication that is the generic equivalent of a brand named drug. A copayment will usually be much less of a generic drug is available and accepted.
Grace period: not to be confused with "waiting period," the grace period is a period of time during which your policy will be continued if your payment is late—usually 30 days.
Hospital: a legally constituted institution with facilities for care and treatment of sick or injured persons on a resident or inpatient basis
HSA: health savings accounts, also known as medical savings account. Allows you to put a portion of pre-tax earnings into a special type of IRA which you can then use tax free to pay for deductibles, co-pays, medication or any other health related expense that is not covered by your insurance.
Indemnify: to insure or provide a benefit according to the terms of the policy
Injury: accidental bodily injury resulting from an accident
Insurability: a condition of being "insurable"; that is, required medical conditions of the person to be insured meet the criteria of the company providing the insurance. Persons with certain medical conditions such as "congestive heart failure" would be considered "uninsurable."
Insured: the person for whom the policy will pay benefits, also called "covered person" in some policies
Life Time Aggregate: the amount of benefit your insurance would pay during your lifetime
Loss: a condition of illness or injury for which you would suffer "loss," that is, have to pay out of your pocket, if you did not have insurance
Medical Underwriting: the evaluation of health questions to determine if a client is insurable under the terms of the plan or company
Office visit: the visit that you make to your doctor's office for any reason
Omissions: information you forget or neglect to tell the company when you take the policy. If discovered, it gives them grounds to cancel the policy.
Out of Pocket Maximum: a dollar amount beyond which you will have increased or 100% coverage for covered expenses if you reach it. Does not include expenses that are not covered
Out of Pocket: the money you have to pay for care in addition to your premium
Outpatient: care provided in the outpatient facilities of a hospital
Physician: any person who is legally qualified and licensed as a practitioner, practicing within the scope of his or her authority and license
Policy Year: each successive, 12 month period extending from the effective date of the policy and continuing for 12 consecutive months
Pre-existing: a condition you had prior to taking the policy
Premium: monthly payment you make for having insurance
Reinstatement: to place a lapsed policy back in force. Often requires proof of insurability
Renewable: you can renew your policy each year and cannot be terminated for having to use it. You can, however, be charged a higher premium every year.
Rider: an attachment to the basic policy which requires additional premium and is not included in the policy itself. For example, dental or vision care
Risk: the likelihood that the company will have to spend more on a person's care than they can recoup through that person's premium. Insurance laws allow a company to refuse high risk clients.
Routine: examinations or treatment for the maintenance of a chronic condition that is not expected to improve, or conducted for the purpose of
affirming wellness. Routine exams are frequently not covered.
Sickness: illness or disease manifested after the policy has been placed in effect
Symptoms: conditions indicating the presence of a disease or illness
Termination: date after which the policy is no longer in effect
Waiting period: a period of time during which your company will not pay for a pre-existing condition.




AAM see ASSOCIATE IN AUTOMATION MANAGEMENT (AAM). 

ABANDONMENT AND SALVAGE legal status giving an insurance company all rights to an insured's property. The ABANDONMENT CLAUSE is usually found in MARINE INSURANCE and not in other property insurance policies such as the HOMEOWNERS INSURANCE POLICY and the SPECIAL MULTIPERIL INSURANCE (SMP) policy. An insured may wish to abandon the hull of a ship if the cost of protecting it exceeds its value. The insured must notify the insurance company of its intent to abandon property but the company is under no obligation to accept the abandoned property. 

ABANDONMENT CLAUSE in marine insurance, clause giving an insured the right to abandon lost or damaged 
property and still claim full settlement from an insurer (subject to certain restrictions). Two types of losses are provided for under abandonment clauses. 

1. Actual total lossproperty so badly damaged it is unrepairable or unrecoverable; causes include fire, sinking, 
windstorm damage, and mysterious disappearance. For example, until the 1980s the Titanic, which sank off 
Newfoundland in 1912, was deemed to be unrecoverable and the Commercial Union Insurance Company had paid its 
owners for their loss due to sinking. Owners of ships that mysteriously disappeared in the Bermuda Triangle have been able to collect insurance proceeds. Disappearance of pleasure craft due to drug pirates has resulted in indemnification of owners through insurance proceeds. 

2. Constructive total lossproperty so badly damaged that the cost of its rehabilitation would be more than its restored 
value. For example, a ship and/or its cargo is damaged to such a degree that the cost of repair would exceed its restored value. The insured can abandon the property if (a) repair costs are greater than 50% of the value of the property after it has been repaired and (b) the insurance company agrees to the insured's intent to abandon. 

ABSOLUTE ASSIGNMENT see ASSIGNMENT CLAUSE. 

ABSOLUTE BENEFICIARY see BENEFICIARY; BENEFICIARY CLAUSE. 

ABSOLUTE LIABILITY liability without fault; also known as liability without regard to fault or strict liability. 
Absolute liability is imposed in various states when actions of an individual or business are deemed contrary to public 
policy, even though an action may not have been intentional or negligent. For example, in product liability, 
manufacturers and retailers have been held strictly liable for products that have caused injuries and have been shown to 
be defective, even though the manufacturer or retailer was not proven to be at fault or negligent. In many states the 
owner of an animal is held strictly liable 

< previous page 	page_1 	next page > 

















file:///C:/0764112627/0764112627/0764112627/0764112627/files/page_1.html [22/11/2009 18:16:38] 

 page_2 
 
< previous page 	page_2 	next page > 
                                                                                            Page 2 
for injuries it may cause, even though it does not have a past history of violence. 

ABUSIVE TAX SHELTER illegal tax deduction (as determined by the Internal Revenue Service) taken under the auspices of a limited partnership. One abuse of taxes is inflating the value of purchased assets far beyond their fair 
market value. Once the IRS determines that tax deductions are illegal, participants in the limited partnership are subject to the payment of back taxes, interest due on the back taxes, and penalties. 

ACCELERATED DEPRECIATION method in which larger amounts of depreciation are taken in the beginning years of the life of an asset and smaller amounts in later years. The objective is to defer taxes legally, thereby allowing funds to be retained by a business to finance growth. 

ACCELERATED OPTION life insurance POLICY PROVISION under which the POLICYHOLDER may apply the accumulated cash value, in the form of a single premium payment, to pay up the policy or to mature the policy as an endowment. 

ACCELERATION LIFE INSURANCE policy under which a portion of the DEATH BENEFIT (generally 25%) 
becomes payable to the insured for a specified medical condition prior to death. The purpose of the accelerated death 
benefit is to provide funds necessary to finance medical costs to extend the life of the insured. Upon proof of a specified 
medical condition, the insurance company will pay 25% of the death benefit. When the insured dies, the remainder of the death benefit is paid to the BENEFICIARY, just as under a traditional life insurance policy. 

ACCELERATIVE ENDOWMENT life insurance policy option under which the DIVIDENDS that have ACCRUED may be applied to mature the policy as ENDOWMENT INSURANCE. 

ACCEPTANCE agreement to an offer, in contract law, thus forming a contract. For insurance contracts, the insurer 
usually acknowledges willingness to underwrite a risk by issuing a policy in exchange for a premium from an applicant. 

ACCIDENT unexpected, unforeseen event not under the control of the insured and resulting in a loss. The insured 
cannot purposefully cause the loss to happen; the loss must be due to pure chance according to the odds of the laws of 
probability. For example, under a PERSONAL AUTOMOBILE POLICY (PAP) if an accident occurs, the insured is 
covered for loss due to his/her negligent act or omissions resulting in bodily injury or property damage to another party. 

ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT INSURANCE form of accident insurance that indemnifies or pays a stated benefit to insured or his/her beneficiary in the event of bodily injury or death due to accidental means 
(other than natural causes). For example, an insured's arm is severed in an accident. A predetermined schedule of payments is used to compensate the insured for this particular loss. 

< previous page 	page_2 	next page > 



















file:///C:/0764112627/0764112627/0764112627/0764112627/files/page_2.html [22/11/2009 18:16:39] 

 page_3 
 
< previous page 	page_3 	next page > 
                                                                                            Page 3 
The schedule also lists the sums payable for other parts of the body that may be lost, or for death by accident. 

ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFIT see ACCIDENTAL DEATH CLAUSE; RIDERS, LIFE POLICIES. 

ACCIDENTAL DEATH CLAUSE in a life insurance policy, benefit in addition to the death benefit paid to the 
beneficiary, should death occur due to an accident. In double indemnity, twice the face value of the policy will be paid to the beneficiary; in triple indemnity, three times the face value is payable. Accidental death caused by war, aviation except as a passenger on a regularly scheduled airline, and illegal activities is generally excluded. Time and age limits are usually applicable, as for example, the insured must die within 90 days of the accident and be age 60 or less. 

ACCIDENTAL DEATH INSURANCE coverage in the event of death due to accident, usually in combination with 
dismemberment insurance. If death is due to accident, payment is made to the insured's beneficiary; if bodily injury is 
the result of an accident (such as the loss of a limb), the insured receives a specified sum. See also ACCIDENTAL DEATH CLAUSE. 

ACCIDENTAL MEANS unexpected, unforeseen event not under the control of the insured that results in bodily injury. 

ACCIDENT AND HEALTH INSURANCE coverage for accidental injury, accidental death, or sickness; also called 
Accident and Sickness Insurance. Benefits include paid hospital expenseyys, medical expenses, surgical expenses, and income payments. See also GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE; HEALTH INSURANCE. 

ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS INSURANCE phrase formerly used to describe coverage for perils of accident and 
sickness. For descriptions of current terms, see also ACCIDENT AND HEALTH INSURANCE; DISABILITY 
INSURANCE; GROUP DISABILITY INSURANCE; GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE; HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION (HMO). 

ACCIDENT FREQUENCY number of times an accident occurs. Used in predicting losses upon which premiums are based. 

ACCIDENT INSURANCE coverage for bodily injury and/or death resulting from accidental means (other than natural 
causes). For example, an insured is critically injured in an accident. Accident insurance can provide income and/or a death benefit if death ensues. 

ACCIDENT PREVENTION see ENGINEERING APPROACH; HUMAN APPROACH. 

ACCIDENT RATE see ACCIDENT FREQUENCY. 

ACCIDENT SEVERITY extent of the loss caused by accidents. Used in predicting the dollar amount of losses upon which the premiums are based. 

< previous page 	page_3 	next page > 


What is mortgage insurance?
If your down payment on a home is less than 20 percent of the appraised value or sale price, you must obtain mortgage insurance.

Mortgage insurance sometimes is referred to as private mortgage insurance, or PMI, to distinguish it from FHA and VA insurance, run by government programs. The cost of mortgage insurance varies depending on the size of the down payment and the loan, but it typically amounts to about one-half of 1 percent of the loan.

With mortgage insurance, the borrower pays the premiums, but the lender is the beneficiary. The coverage protects lenders against default by the borrower. If a borrower stops paying on a mortgage, the insurance company ensures that the lender will be paid in full.

Mortgage companies pick insurance providers for their customers, but the borrowers have to foot the bill. Usually, they do so in monthly installments. But some lenders offer programs whereby the borrower pays the entire insurance premium in a lump sum at closing.
For all of those who think Mortgage Insurance is just a scam there is a simple answer, save up 20% for a down payment, make sure you have good credit, and qualify for a Conventional Mortgage. If you have to do an FHA loan then maybe you should wait, establish good credit, save up money for a down payment. If you don't want to do any of those things then you are viewed as a higher risk and are charged accordingly.
Saving 20% for a down payment is nearly impossible for most people today so PMI is just an unfortunate fact of life which will have to be dealt with by most. Housing costs are skyrocketing, but rental rates are even more insane so people often can't afford to save money while renting because all their money goes towards rent. It is a catch 22 and people get stuck in renting. I also can't forget to throw college loans on top of that which decimate the chance of most being able to consider purchasing a home in their 20s. This country is pricing itself into poverty and becoming a rental nation rather than a home ownership nation. Most properties are being bought as investment for wealthy people to flip later on or rent out...not by normal individuals.
Do you need mortgage protection insurance?
Odds are if you're paying a mortgage, you've received offers for mortgage protection insurance. It comes in several forms, but it typically covers your mortgage if you lose your job or become disabled, or it pays off your mortgage when you die.

Would you benefit from mortgage protection insurance? Or is it just another way for your mortgage company to siphon extra money out of your wallet each month while protecting itself upon your death?

The answer depends on your health, financial situation and what you want to happen when you die. Here are the pros and cons of mortgage protection insurance, along with tips for getting the best policy at the right price.

What is mortgage protection insurance?
Mortgage protection insurance, or MPI, is also called mortgage payment protection insurance, or MPPI. It's simply life insurance that pays your mortgage if a certain event, such as death, disability or job loss occurs, explains Kevin M. Lynch, an assistant professor of insurance at The American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa. The cost depends on factors such as the amount of your mortgage and your age and health. For disability MPI, costs also vary depending on your occupation.
Many people confuse MPI with private mortgage insurance, or PMI. "You're required by law to get PMI if you put less than 20 percent down to purchase your home," says Christopher Ketcham, senior director of knowledge resources at the Insurance Institute of America in Malvern, Pa. "It has nothing to do with disability, job loss, or death. It pays the bank if you're foreclosed on."

If you purchase mortgage protection insurance that pays off your mortgage when you die, the insurance company will send a check directly to your mortgage company, leaving your heirs with a home unencumbered by a mortgage. Payments will also go directly to your mortgage company if your policy pays upon disability or job loss, but only for a certain period, typically a year or two, and there may be a waiting period before payments kick in, says Ketcham. Disability or job-loss policies pay only the principal and interest on your mortgage. But you may be able to get a rider to cover other mortgage-related expenses like homeowners association fees.

The benefits of mortgage protection insurance
One benefit of MPI is that it's typically issued on a "guaranteed acceptance" basis. "If you fill out the application, few questions will be asked to keep you from getting coverage," says Lynch. "That's valuable for people who are uninsurable or insurable at a high rate because of health issues." It's also valuable for people who work in high-risk occupations, such as roofers, who usually can't get disability insurance.
The drawbacks of mortgage protection insurance
Obviously, mortgage protection insurance is a waste of money if you own your home outright. In addition, MPI is a declining-benefit policy, which means that even though you pay a set premium for the life of your mortgage, the payoff amount decreases as you pay down your mortgage.
Wiping out your mortgage may also not be the best financial move for your family if you die. "When my father passed away very young, my mother's home was paid off by a lump-sum payment to the mortgage company," says Lynch. "Her mortgage payment was something like $112 a month. It would have been more beneficial for her to receive the lump sum and earn the 18 percent interest banks were paying in the 1980s while continuing to make the mortgage payment."

Some financial planners also say purchasing MPI is like buying tires when you need a car. "Focusing on insuring for the mortgage is relatively myopic," says Vernon Holleman III, president of The Holleman Cos., a financial planning company in Chevy Chase, Md. "You ought to think about financial planning more globally. Whether to pay off the mortgage upon a breadwinner's death is a question you can't answer unless you're taking a comprehensive look at the family's finances."

Choosing and saving on MPI
If you have health or job risks that make life or disability insurance unavailable or too expensive, mortgage protection insurance is probably a smart option. But don't sign up through your mortgage company without shopping around.
"Ask about the price and features of each policy and whether it can be converted into whole life insurance," says Ketcham. "Also investigate the insurer's financial condition through A.M. Best Co., which rates insurers."

If you're considering MPI payable on your death, Holleman suggests purchasing a level life insurance policy instead, which doesn't decrease in value, that will cover not only your mortgage but also your family's living and educational expenses without your income.

"You're far better off using a level product because most insurance carriers allow a later reduction in the policy's face value," says Holleman. "If at, say, year seven in your policy, you decide your need isn't $1 million but only $800,000, you can reduce the face amount and save through the reduced premium. You're better off controlling the benefit than having it automatically reduced."
DEFINITION OF 'MORTGAGE INSURANCE'
An insurance policy that protects a mortgage lender or title holder in the event that the borrower defaults on payments, dies, or is otherwise unable to meet the contractual obligations of the mortgage. Mortgage insurance can refer to private mortgage insurance (PMI), mortgage life insurance, or mortgage title insurance. What these have in common is an obligation to make the lender or property holder whole in the event of specific cases of loss. 

Private mortgage insurance may be called "lender's mortgage insurance" (LMI) if the premium on a PMI policy is paid by the lender and not the borrower. This is typically done in exchange for a higher rate or fee structure on the mortgage itself. 
INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'MORTGAGE INSURANCE'
Mortgage insurance may come with a typical pay-as-you-go" premium payment, or may be capitalized into a lump sum payment at the time the mortgage is originated. For homeowners who are required to have PMI because of the 80% loan-to-value ratio rule, they can request that the insurance policy be canceled once 20% of the principal balance has been paid off. 

Mortgage life insurance can be either declining-term (the payout drops as the mortgage balance drops) or level in its payout, although the latter costs more. 
Mortgage Insurance (also known as mortgage guarantee and home-loan insurance) is an insurance policy which compensates lenders or investors for losses due to the default of a mortgage loan. Mortgage insurance can be either public or private depending upon the insurer. The policy is also known as a mortgage indemnity guarantee (MIG), particularly in the UK.
In Australia, borrowers must pay Lenders Mortgage Insurance (LMI) for home loans over 80% of the purchase price.
In Singapore, it is mandatory for owners of HDB flats to have a mortgage insurance if they are using the balance in their Central Provident Fund (CPF) accounts to pay for the monthly instalment on their mortgage. However, they have the choice of selecting a mortgage insurance administered by the CPF Board or stipulated private insurers.[citation needed]

On the other hand, it is not mandatory for owners of private homes in Singapore to take a mortgage insurance.
Private mortgage insurance[edit]
Private mortgage insurance is typically required when down payments are below 20%. Rates can range from 0.32% to 1.20% of the principal of the loan per year based upon loan factors such as the percent of the loan insured, loan-to-value (LTV), fixed or variable, and credit score.[1] The rates may be paid in a single lump sum, annually, monthly, or in some combination of the two (split premiums). In the U.S., payments by the borrower were tax-deductible until 2010.

Borrower-paid private mortgage insurance[edit]
BPMI or "Traditional Mortgage Insurance" is a default insurance on mortgage loans provided by private insurance companies and paid for by borrowers. BPMI allows borrowers to obtain a mortgage without having to provide 20% down payment, by covering the lender for the added risk of a high loan-to-value (LTV) mortgage. The US Homeowners Protection Act of 1998 allows for borrowers to request PMI cancellation when the amount owed is reduced to a certain level. The Act requires cancellation of borrower-paid mortgage insurance when a certain date is reached. This date is when the loan is scheduled to reach 78% of the original appraised value or sales price is reached, whichever is less, based on the original amortization schedule for fixed-rate loans and the current amortization schedule for adjustable-rate mortgages. BPMI can, under certain circumstances, be cancelled earlier by the servicer ordering a new appraisal showing that the loan balance is less than 80% of the home's value due to appreciation. This generally requires at least two years of on-time payments. Each investor's LTV requirements for PMI cancellation differ based on the age of the loan and current or original occupancy of the home. While the Act applies only to single family primary residences at closing, the investors Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac allow mortgage servicers to follow the same rules for secondary residences. Investment properties typically require lower LTVs.

There is a growing trend for BPMI to be used with the Fannie Mae 3% downpayment program. In some cases, the Lender is giving the borrower a credit to cover the cost of BPMI.

Lender-paid private mortgage insurance[edit]
LPMI is similar to BPMI except that it is paid for by the lender, and the borrower is often unaware of its existence. LPMI is usually a feature of loans that claim not to require Mortgage Insurance for high LTV loans. The cost of the premium is built into the interest rate charged on the loan.

Contracts[edit]
As with other insurance, an insurance policy is part of the insurance transaction. In mortgage insurance, a master policy issued to a bank or other mortgage-holding entity (the policyholder) lays out the terms and conditions of the coverage under insurance certificates. The certificates document the particular characteristics and conditions of each individual loan. The master policy includes various conditions including exclusions (conditions for denying coverage), conditions for notification of loans in default, and claims settlement.[2] The contractual provisions in the master policy have received increased scrutiny since the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States. Master policies generally require timely notice of default include provisions on monthly reports, time to file suit limitations, arbitration agreements, and exclusions for negligence, misrepresentation, and other conditions such as pre-existing environmental contaminants. The exclusions sometimes have "incontestability provisions" which limit the ability of the mortgage insurer to deny coverage for misrepresentations attributed to the policyholder if twelve consecutive payments are made, although these incontestability provisions generally don't apply to outright fraud.[3]

Coverage can be rescinded if misrepresentation or fraud exists. In 2009, the United States District Court for the Central District of California determined that mortgage insurance could not be rescinded "poolwide".[3]

History[edit]
Mortgage insurance began in the United States in the 1880s, and the first law on it was passed in New York in 1904. The industry grew in response to the 1920s real estate bubble and was "entirely bankrupted" after the Great Depression. By 1933, no private mortgage insurance companies existed.[4]:15 The bankruptcy was related to the industry's involvement in "mortgage pools", an early practice similar to mortgage securitization. The federal government began insuring mortgages in 1934 through the Federal Housing Administration and Veteran's Administration, but after the Great Depression no private mortgage insurance was authorized in the United States until 1956, when Wisconsin passed a law allowing the first post-Depression insurer, Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation, to be chartered. This was followed by a California law in 1961 which would become the standard for other states' mortgage insurance laws. Eventually the National Association of Insurance Commissioners created a model law.[5]

Max H. Karl, a Milwaukee lawyer, invented the modern form of private mortgage insurance and helped put home ownership within reach for millions of families. In the 1950s, Mr. Karl became frustrated with the time and paperwork required to obtain a home backed by Federal Government insurance, the only kind available at the time. In 1957, using $250,000 raised from friends and other investors in his hometown of Milwaukee, Mr. Karl founded the Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation (MGIC). Unlike many mortgage insurers who collapsed during the Depression, MGIC would only insure the first 20 percent of loss on a defaulted mortgage, thus limiting its exposure and creating more incentives for savings and loan associations and other lenders to issue loans only to home buyers who could afford them. The guarantee was enough to encourage lenders across the country to issue mortgage loans to buyers whose down payments were less than 20 percent of the home's price. The availability of credit helped fuel the home building boom of the 1960s and 1970s. By the time of Mr. Karl's death in 1995, more than 12 percent of the nation's nearly $4 trillion in home mortgages had private mortgage insurance.[6]

In 1998 the Homeowners Protection Act of 1998 came into effect in 1999 as a federal law of the United States, which requires automatic termination of mortgage insurance in certain cases for homeowners when the loan-to-value on the home reaches 78%; prior to the law, homeowners had limited recourse to cancel[7] and by one estimate, 250,000 homeowners were paying for unnecessary mortgage insurance.[8] Similar state laws existed in eight states at the time of its passage;[9] in 2000, a lawsuit by Eliot Spitzer resulted in refunds due to mortgage insurers lack of compliance with a 1984 New York state law which required insurers to stop charging homeowners after a certain point.[10] These laws may continue to apply; for example, the New York law provides "broader protection".[11]

For Federal Housing Administration-insured loans, the cancellation requirements may be more difficult.
In insurance, the insurance policy is a contract (generally a standard form contract) between the insurer and the insured, known as the policyholder, which determines the claims which the insurer is legally required to pay. In exchange for an initial payment, known as the premium, the insurer promises to pay for loss caused by perils covered under the policy language.

Insurance contracts are designed to meet specific needs and thus have many features not found in many other types of contracts. Since insurance policies are standard forms, they feature boilerplate language which is similar across a wide variety of different types of insurance policies.

The insurance policy is generally an integrated contract, meaning that it includes all forms associated with the agreement between the insured and insurer.[1]:10 In some cases, however, supplementary writings such as letters sent after the final agreement can make the insurance policy a non-integrated contract.[1]:11 One insurance textbook states that generally "courts consider all prior negotiations or agreements ... every contractual term in the policy at the time of delivery, as well as those written afterwards as policy riders and endorsements ... with both parties' consent, are part of written policy".[2] The textbook also states that the policy must refer to all papers which are part of the policy.[2] Oral agreements are subject to the parol evidence rule, and may not be considered part of the policy if the contract appears to be whole. Advertising materials and circulars are typically not part of a policy.[2] Oral contracts pending the issuance of a written policy can occur.[2]

Contents  [hide] 
1 General features
2 Structure
3 Parts of an insurance contract
4 Industry standard forms
4.1 Manuscript policies and endorsements
5 References
General features[edit]
The insurance contract or agreement is a contract whereby the insurer will pay the insured (the person whom benefits would be paid to, or on behalf of), if certain defined events occur. Subject to the "fortuity principle", the event must be uncertain. The uncertainty can be either as to when the event will happen (e.g. in a life insurance policy, the time of the insured's death is uncertain) or as to if it will happen at all (e.g. in a fire insurance policy, whether or not a fire will occur at all).

Insurance contracts are generally considered contracts of adhesion because the insurer draws up the contract and the insured has little or no ability to make material changes to it. This is interpreted to mean that the insurer bears the burden if there is any ambiguity in any terms of the contract. Insurance policies are sold without the policyholder even seeing a copy of the contract.[1]:27 In 1970 Robert Keeton suggested that many courts were actually applying 'reasonable expectations' rather than interpreting ambiguities, which he called the 'reasonable expectations doctrine'. This doctrine has been controversial, with some courts adopting it and others explicitly rejecting it.[3] In several jurisdictions, including California, Wyoming, and Pennsylvania, the insured is bound by clear and conspicuous terms in the contract even if the evidence suggests that the insured did not read or understand them.[4][5][6]
Insurance contracts are aleatory in that the amounts exchanged by the insured and insurer are unequal and depend upon uncertain future events. In contrast, ordinary non-insurance contracts are commutative in that the amounts (or values) exchanged are usually intended by the parties to be roughly equal. This distinction is particularly important in the context of exotic products like finite risk insurance which contain "commutation" provisions.
Insurance contracts are unilateral, meaning that only the insurer makes legally enforceable promises in the contract. The insured is not required to pay the premiums, but the insurer is required to pay the benefits under the contract if the insured has paid the premiums and met certain other basic provisions.
Insurance contracts are governed by the principle of utmost good faith (uberrima fides) which requires both parties of the insurance contract to deal in good faith and in particular it imparts on the insured a duty to disclose all material facts which relate to the risk to be covered. This contrasts with the legal doctrine that covers most other types of contracts, caveat emptor (let the buyer beware). In the United States, the insured can sue an insurer in tort for acting in bad faith.
Structure[edit]
Early insurance contracts tended to be written on the basis of every single type of risk (where risks were defined extremely narrowly), and a separate premium was calculated and charged for each. This structure proved unsustainable in the context of the Second Industrial Revolution, in that a typical large conglomerate might have dozens of types of risks to insure against.

In the 1940s, the insurance industry shifted to the current system where covered risks are initially defined broadly in an insuring agreement on a general policy form (e.g., "We will pay all sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages..."), then narrowed down by subsequent exclusion clauses (e.g., "This insurance does not apply to..."). If the insured desires coverage for a risk taken out by an exclusion on the standard form, the insured can sometimes pay an additional premium for an endorsement to the policy that overrides the exclusion.

Insurers have been criticized in some quarters for the development of complex policies with layers of interactions between coverage clauses, conditions, exclusions, and exceptions to exclusions. In a case interpreting one ancestor of the modern "products-completed operations hazard" clause, the Supreme Court of California complained:

“	The instant case presents yet another illustration of the dangers of the present complex structuring of insurance policies. Unfortunately the insurance industry has become addicted to the practice of building into policies one condition or exception upon another in the shape of a linguistic Tower of Babel. We join other courts in decrying a trend which both plunges the insured into a state of uncertainty and burdens the judiciary with the task of resolving it. We reiterate our plea for clarity and simplicity in policies that fulfill so important a public service.[7]	”
Parts of an insurance contract[edit]
Declarations - identifies who is an insured, the insured's address, the insuring company, what risks or property are covered, the policy limits (amount of insurance), any applicable deductibles, the policy period and premium amount. These are usually provided on a form that is filled out by the insurer based on the insured's application and attached on top of or inserted within the first few pages of the standard policy form.
Definitions - define important terms used in the policy language.
Insuring agreement - describes the covered perils, or risks assumed, or nature of coverage, or makes some reference to the contractual agreement between insurer and insured. It summarizes the major promises of the insurance company, as well as stating what is covered.
Exclusions - take coverage away from the Insuring Agreement by describing property, perils, hazards or losses arising from specific causes which are not covered by the policy.
Conditions - provisions, rules of conduct, duties and obligations required for coverage. If policy conditions are not met, the insurer can deny the claim.
Endorsements - additional forms attached to the policy form that modify it in some way, either unconditionally or upon the existence of some condition. Endorsements can make policies difficult to read for nonlawyers; they may modify or delete clauses located several pages earlier in the standard insuring agreement, or even modify each other. Because it is very risky to allow nonlawyer underwriters to directly rewrite core policy language with word processors, insurers usually direct underwriters to modify standard forms by attaching endorsements preapproved by counsel for various common modifications.
Policy riders - A policy rider is used to convey the terms of a policy amendment and the amendment thereby becomes part of the policy. Riders are dated and numbered so that both insurer and policyholder can determine provisions and the benefit level. Common riders to group medical plans involve name changes, change to eligible classes of employees, change in level of benefits, or the addition of a managed care arrangement such as an Health Maintenance Organization or Preferred Provider Organization (PPO).[8]
Policy jackets - A policy jacket is a cover, binder, envelope, or presentation folder with pockets in which the policy may be delivered. Historically, standard boilerplate provisions common to an entire family of policies were often printed on the jacket itself; then the underwriter would type up the declarations form and insert that form along with insuring agreement and endorsement forms into the jacket to assemble a complete policy. They are increasingly rare because jackets do not feed through automatic document feeders and must be manually copied or scanned in order to produce a complete image of the entire policy text. Some insurers now use the term "jacket" for a set of papers appended to all policies which serve the same purpose as a traditional policy jacket.
Industry standard forms[edit]
In the United States, property and casualty insurers typically use similar or even identical language in their standard insurance policies, which are drafted by advisory organizations such as the Insurance Services Office and the American Association of Insurance Services.[9] This reduces the regulatory burden for insurers as policy forms must be approved by states; it also allows consumers to more readily compare policies, albeit at the expense of consumer choice.[9] In addition, as policy forms are reviewed by courts, the interpretations become more predictable as courts elaborate upon the interpretation of the same clauses in the same policy forms, rather than different policies from different insurers.[10]

In recent years, however, insurers have increasingly modified the standard forms in company-specific ways or declined to adopt changes[11] to standard forms. For example, a review of home insurance policies found substantial differences in various provisions.[12] In some areas such as directors and officers liability insurance[13] and personal umbrella insurance[14] there is little industry-wide standardization.

Manuscript policies and endorsements[edit]
For the vast majority of insurance policies, the only page that is heavily custom-written to the insured's needs is the declarations page. All other pages are standard forms that refer back to terms defined in the declarations as needed.

However, certain types of insurance, such as media insurance, are written as manuscript policies, which are either custom-drafted from scratch or written from a mix of standard and nonstandard forms.[15] By analogy, policy endorsements which are not written on standard forms or whose language is custom-written to fit the insured's particular circumstances are known as manuscript endorsements.
Do I need mortgage insurance?
Mortgage insurance basics

It's a good idea to protect your mortgage payments in case you can't work
If you have a mortgage, repayments are likely to be your biggest monthly outgoing and, unfortunately, the need to pay it doesn't end if you're unable to work. 

So, it may be a good idea to take out some kind of mortgage insurance to cover the cost in the event of an accident, sickness or unemployment.

Mortgage insurance or income protection
One option is mortgage payment protection insurance (MPPI) where if you become unemployed or cannot work due to an accident or ill-health then your insurer will pay you a set amount each month to cover your mortgage repayments for one or two years.

Another option is income protection insurance (IP) which will pay a proportion of your income every month if you are not well enough to work over a set period of time such as until you return to work or reach retirement age.

Which? thinks that IP should be your first choice if you want to take out insurance against being unable to work because it can be a more comprehensive way to cover your financial outgoings. But because IP provides a higher level of cover, it is more expensive than MPPI.

If you cannot afford full IP, then MPPI could be a good option for you but you should look at other alternatives to mortgage insurance before making a decision.

Typical mortgage insurance premiums
Mortgage insurance premiums will vary depending on a number of factors including:

Your age
The cost of your mortgage repayments
What product features you opt for
What type of employment you have
There is not really a typical premium, but you should expect to pay between £15 and £100 a month.

Mortgage insurance premiums can increase
One of the potential problems with MPPI is that insurers can increase the cost year on year. In the past there has been evidence of providers unfairly raising premiums often at the same time as cutting back cover. In 2009, the FCA took action against this and the regulator says it has not had to intervene in this market since so it looks as if providers have cleaned up their act. 

You should keep a close eye on premiums, ideally you should be looking to fix the cost for at least five years to ensure you are getting a good value policy.

Mortgage insurance is not the same as payment protection insurance
Following the wide mis-selling of Payment Protection Insurance (PPI) with loans and credit cards many people are understandably quite wary of taking out this kind of insurance. But MPPI, which is specifically tied to mortgages was not as widely mis-sold as other PPI products and may be suitable for some people. 

If you're worried you may have been mis-sold MPPI then you can put in a complaint using our free PPI tool.

Need a mortgage?
The Which? mortgage comparison tables let you search all available deals from lenders large and small to choose the best deals based on quality of service as well as cost and benefits.
What mortgage insurance covers
Mortgage contract
Make sure the cover offered suits your needs before taking out a policy
For a monthly premium, mortgage insurance will pay you a set amount each month, usually for a period of 12 or 24 months, if you are unable to work because of accident, sickness or unemployment. For this reason, mortgage insurance is also known as 'ASU'.

As it only pays out for a limited period, it may not be the best form of mortgage insurance for you. See Alternatives to mortgage insurance for more information on other options.

Mortgage insurance options
There are a range of policy options available to suit your needs. You can opt for policies which only cover you for an accident and sickness or for unemployment. If you do not need full protection, this could lower the cost of your monthly premiums.

When you take out the policy you can choose how much you would like it to pay out each month. Most policies will also let you also cover other monthly bills, such as utilities, as well as your mortgage.

The majority of policies will pay out a maximum benefit of between £1,500 and £3,000 a month. Other providers will pay a percentage of your salary e.g. 75% or pay money on top of your mortgage e.g. 150% of your monthly repayments.

Mortgage insurance exclusion periods
Most policies will not cover you straightaway so it may be a few months after buying a policy before you are able to claim on it. This is known as an exclusion period and these can vary between 30 days and 180 days. 

Unemployment cover is likely to have a longer exclusion period than accident or sickness. This is to prevent people who know they are going to be made redundant from taking out policies. 

Action point: Mortgage insurance exclusions - find out more about the conditions you may encounter

Mortgage insurance waiting Periods 
Before claiming you will need to be off work for a specified number of days, this is known as the waiting period or excess period and can range from 30 days to 180 days. For example, if you stopped work on 1 September and the waiting period was 30 days, you could put in a claim on 1 October. The longer the waiting period the cheaper the policy is likely to be.

Back to day one mortgage insurance policies
It is also possible to get policies which will pay out from day one of you being off work, these are known as 'back-to-day-one' policies.

All policies will pay you in arrears so you whether or not there is a waiting period you would receive your first payment one month after your claim is accepted.  

In general, the longer the waiting period you choose, the cheaper the policy. So if your employer offers sickness benefits or you have some savings which you can rely for a number of months you may want to take out a policy with a longer waiting period. 

Need a mortgage?
The Which? mortgage comparison tables let you search all available deals from lenders large and small to choose the best deals based on quality of service as well as cost and benefits.
Mortgage insurance exclusions
House on a hand
Check the terms of your mortgage insurance carefully before buying
Mortgage insurance policies have a range of exclusions, so you should examine these carefully before taking one out.

Initial exclusion period on mortgage insurance
Most mortgage insurance policies don't let you claim if you become unemployed during a certain period after first taking out the policy - the 'initial exclusion' period. This period is normally between 30 and 180 days. 

If becoming redundant is something which may happen to you in the next few months then this kind of mortgage insurance policy is unlikely to cover you. But there may be other redundancy help you are entitled to.

Some policies also have initial exclusion periods for accident and sickness claims.

Pre-existing medical conditions and mortgage insurance
If you have an ongoing health problem which you have experienced in the last 12 months it is likely this will affect your mortgage insurance, even if you are not suffering from it when you take out the policy.

Some policies will provide no cover at all for pre-existing medical conditions whereas others have strict conditions attached. For example, you won't normally be able to claim for time off due to a pre-existing condition if it recurs within 12 or 24 months (depending on the policy) of taking out mortgage insurance.

So if you have a chronic health problem which means you regularly need to take time of work and it is likely to affect you in the next year or two you should think very carefully about whether mortgage insurance is right for you.

Stress and back problems and mortgage insurance
Despite being some of the most common reasons for needing time off work you may have difficulty claiming for stress, depression or other mental health conditions as well as back problems. 

If you experience mental health problems it is likely you will need to provide evidence from a medical specialist and for back problems you may need to provide radiological evidence before your insurer will pay out. 

There will be other medical exclusions and conditions too which you should check carefully before taking out a policy.

Employment conditions
Your occupation or the type of employment contract you have may impact on what policy you can get. Most providers will now cater for self-employed people and a variety of occupations. But you should read all the small print carefully to check you are not exempt for example if you are on a casual or fixed term contract.
Do I need mortgage insurance?
Alternatives to mortgage insurance

Alternatives to mortgage insurance, like income protection, could be better value for money
Before you decide whether to take out mortgage insurance, it is worth thinking about whether other forms of protection insurance may be better suited to your needs. You may also find that your employer provides sickness benefits that are adequate for you.

Although mortgage  insurance can be one of the cheapest ways to cover your mortgage, and won't usually affect your state benefits, other types of protection insurance could give you better cover and better value for money.

Alternatives to mortgage insurance: Employee benefits
Before you take out any new protection check if there are any benefits offered by your employer. Some employers will continue to pay your salary or a proportion of it for a set time period if you need to take time off due to illness. Or you may be covered by income protection insurance through work.

Even if your employer offers no formal protection benefits, you can still claim Statutory Sick Pay from your employer for up to 28 weeks if you can't work due to ill health.

You're entitled to sick pay if you've been working for an employer under a contract of service, even if you are a new employee. To claim it you must be sick for at least four days in a row and  have average earnings of at least £107 a week. The current weekly rate of Statutory Sick Pay is £85.85

Alternatives to mortgage insurance: Other types of protection insurance
Income protection: Another type of protection insurance is income protection (IP) which pays around 50% of your salary if you can’t work because of an accident or sickness. 

It will pay out longer than mortgage insurance, for example until you can go back to work or reach retirement, but does not cover unemployment. It is a more effective way of insuring against ill-health than mortgage insurance as you are medically assessed when taking out the policy and will know in advance what you will and won’t be covered for.

Critical illnes insurance: Another type of protection is critical illness insurance (CII), which pays a lump sum if you are diagnosed with a serious illness, but it will not provide a regular income.

Life insurance: If you have dependants then you may also want to consider taking out life insurance which will pay out a lump sum in the event of your death. Depending on the type of mortgage you have you can choose policies that will pay out a fixed amount or one that decreases over time if you have a repayment mortgage.

Action point: Read our guide to protection insurance for more information about income protection, life insurance or critical illness insurance.

Alternatives to mortgage insurance: Government help
Government help should only be used as a last resort as it will not cover your full mortgage repayments and you may not be eligible for it. If you become unemployed you may be able to get state benefits such as Jobseeker's Allowance or Employment and Support Allowance.

If you're eligible for these benefits you may be able to apply for the Support for Mortgage Interest scheme (SMI). Under the scheme your lender will receive payments from the government covering all or part of the interest on the first £200,000 of your mortgage at the Bank of England’s published monthly average mortgage interest rate. 

These payments will not cover the capital and will only be paid for up to two years if you are claiming in addition to income-related Jobseekers Allowance. Visit Directgov for more information on government schemes.
Why You Don’t Need Mortgage Protection Life Insurance
Shortly after you close on a mortgage, whether it’s because you just bought a home or refinanced your existing loan, you’ll probably start getting daily solicitations in the mail urging you to purchase mortgage protection life insurance.

These solicitations disguise themselves as official requests from your mortgage lender with details about your mortgage, like your lender’s name, how much you borrowed, your loan type and, of course, your name and address. In stern, bold lettering, they lead with statements like these:

“IMPORTANT NOTICE: PLEASE COMPLETE AND RETURN”
“FINAL NOTICE: MORTGAGE PROTECTION CARD”
“NOTICE OF OFFERING: MORTGAGE FREE HOME PROTECTION”
Then they get into the scare tactics and emotional pleas:

“What if you die suddenly? Would your family be able to continue paying the mortgage and maintain the same quality of life?”

The solution they offer is a program claiming to “protect your family in case of an unexpected tragedy by paying off your mortgage.” It’s called a mortgage protection program or mortgage protection life insurance. “Without this plan,” the solicitations say, “your family would still have to make your monthly mortgage payments.”

But mortgage protection insurance (MPI) is really just a type of life insurance. It’s sold by banks affiliated with lenders and by independent insurance companies that can obtain information about your mortgage from public records. Policy terms and conditions vary by state and by insurance company; the information provided here is meant to be a general overview and may not precisely reflect the terms of any specific policy. That being said, most people don’t need mortgage protection life insurance. Here's why, plus information on who might actually benefit from having one of these plans.

No Flexibility

With regular term life insurance, your survivors or caretakers can use the money they receive as they see fit. They don’t have to use it to instantly pay off the mortgage if they think it would be better spent for other expenses. With some mortgage protection insurance policies, particularly those purchased through your lender, the insurer sends the benefit payment directly to your lender. A better option is a policy that pays your loved ones directly.

Higher Cost

If you’re healthy and have never used tobacco, you’ll usually pay more for coverage with mortgage protection insurance than you would for term life insurance.

“The main reason for not buying the MPI is the cost,” says Bakul Modi, an insurance adviser at Protection from Life in the Raleigh-Durham, N.C. area. “It typically offers a declining amount of coverage for a cost that is higher than a term policy. You can get level term protection for a lower cost with term insurance.”

Unlike other types of insurance, it’s difficult to get a quote for mortgage protection insurance online. Prices for mortgage protection insurance can vary widely; there is less transparency in this market and there are too many variables to accurately compare prices, Modi says. But here is one example of the difference in payment: For a 35-year-old male nonsmoker living in New York, a 30-year mortgage life insurance policy from State Farm might cost $755 per year. If he qualified for the best rates on a 30-year term life insurance policy, he might pay $345 per year; if he qualified for the worst rates on the same policy, he might pay $677.50 per year. These prices are subject to underwriting, which may require a medical exam.

What’s more, the premiums on the mortgage protection policy would only be fixed for the first five years; after that, they could go up or down. You’ll have to consult the policy to see how high the premiums could get. By contrast, the term policy has fixed premiums for 30 years; no surprises or price increases.

Declining Payout

Many mortgage protection policies do offer level premiums for the policy’s duration, meaning that your premiums will stay the same. This feature sounds great – until you realize that while you’re paying the same premiums, the coverage the premiums buy you shrinks over time and the potential payout decreases.


State Farm’s mortgage protection product, like many others, has a declining payout. Here's the reasoning: The insurance is designed to pay off your mortgage balance, and each month, you pay down part of your mortgage principal. Therefore, the mortgage protection insurance policy’s potential payout shrinks every time you pay your mortgage. For this reason, you might see it referred to as “decreasing term” insurance. Some companies do offer a mortgage protection product where the payout doesn’t decline; this feature is called a level death benefit.

Returned (But Inflation-Eroded) Premiums

Some mortgage protection insurance policies will return your premiums if you never file a claim. Does this make up for the fact that your coverage declines although you keep paying the same amount? Not really. After 15 or 30 years, when your mortgage is paid off and you get your premiums back, they’ll be worth far less because inflation will have eroded their value. You also will have lost the opportunity to invest what you saved from purchasing cheaper term life insurance instead of mortgage protection insurance. That’s 15 or 30 years of potential compounding returns down the drain.

So Who Might Benefit?

Some people don't ’t qualify for term life insurance because of their medical history or current poor health – and aren’t eligible for a group policy that doesn’t require medical underwriting (employer life insurance may not require a medical exam, for example). For these individuals, mortgage protection insurance could be a useful alternative. .

“MPI is usually sold without underwriting,” Modi says, “so if you are unable to get term, MPI might make sense.”

If that fits your situation, get quotes from several companies – not necessarily the ones that sent you the alarming letters through the mail. Any time you purchase insurance, check the firm’s financial strength rating with A.M. Best, a company that gives insurers a letter grade to help consumers evaluate whether the insurer will be able to pay them if they file a claim.

To avoid MPI's declining-payout situation, you might be better off with a no-medical-exam (also called “guaranteed issue”) term policy with level premiums and a level death benefit. These policies cost more and sometimes have lower coverage than term policies that review your health and medical history, but they’ll pay the same benefit whether you die 5 or 25 years into your mortgage.

Another possibility: Mortgage protection insurance could offer more coverage at a better price earlier in your mortgage term, but once you’ve paid down the principal significantly, you might be better off switching to a guaranteed issue term policy.

“If you cannot qualify for term insurance, be sure to shop around,” Modi says. Compare the fine print to see what you’re really getting for your money. “While there are scams out there, it is a legitimate, albeit expensive, product,” he says. “Not all policies are equal.”

Here are two more important considerations if you're considering MPI:

Age Limits

Like many other types of life insurance, mortgage protection insurance may not be available after a certain age. State Farm, for example, only offers 30-year mortgage protection insurance to applicants age 45 or younger; the age limit is 36 in New York. You’ll need to be 60 or younger to get a 15-year policy.

Don't Confuse It With Private Mortgage Insurance

While the names sound similar, mortgage protection insurance and private mortgage insurance are completely different products. Private mortgage insurance protects the lender, not you. If you put down less than 20% on your home, you pay monthly premiums to a PMI policy that will pay your lender if you default. If you die, your heirs will continue to owe the mortgage payments and would have to default on them before PMI kicks in. If anyone depends on your income, be sure that you purchase life insurance to help them pay the mortgage and other expenses after your death.

The Hard Sell

Mortgage protection insurance companies might try to convince you that you need their product in addition to life insurance. They’ll tell you that paying off the mortgage will eat up a major portion of your life insurance proceeds, leaving much less for your survivors to meet their basic living expenses. But if you don’t think you have enough life insurance, you should buy more; it will probably cost less to increase that coverage than to purchase a separate mortgage protection policy. The other flaw in this argument’s logic is that your survivors would need to pay off the mortgage if you died unexpectedly; that isn’t always the case, and isn’t necessarily the best use of insurance proceeds.

The Bottom Line

Financial experts usually don’t recommend any insurance product that only pays certain bills. If you’re concerned about your spouse or children inheriting a mortgage they might not be able to pay, term life insurance is the best option for those who qualify. Most people should consider mortgage protection life insurance only as a last resort.
Mortgage Life Insurance Helps Protect Your Family's Home

Your home may be one of the biggest investments you'll ever make, and your family probably depends on your income to help make the mortgage payments. So in the event of your death, your loved ones might struggle to keep the home. You can help prevent that from happening. Take an important step now to help protect your home and family with a State Farm® Mortgage Life insurance policy.
How it Works

A mortgage term life insurance policy helps guarantee your loved ones a tax-free benefit in the event of your death — funds they can use to help with mortgage payments.

Policy terms are available for 15 or 30 years.
Premiums can be paid monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, or annually. 
You can choose the coverage you need based on your mortgage balance. After the first five years, the death benefit, which is intended to behave like your mortgage, decreases over the life of the policy, but will never be less than 20% of the original face amount of insurance. 
Premiums are scheduled to be level for the life of the policy. Your premiums may be raised or lowered after you have had the policy for five years, but they will never exceed the maximum premiums stated in the policy. 
No matter how large your death benefit, it passes to your beneficiaries generally income tax-free. 
If you have auto insurance with State Farm, purchasing a State Farm Mortgage Life insurance policy may entitle you to a discount on your auto premiums with our multi-line discount.
Need lifelong coverage? Just convert your mortgage term life insurance policy to permanent coverage and premiums any time the policy is in force — no matter what your state of health
Veterans' Mortgage Life Insurance
Veterans' Mortgage Life Insurance (VMLI) is mortgage protection insurance that can help families of severely disabled Servicemembers or Veterans pay off the home mortgage in the event of their death.
Eligibility
VMLI is only available to Servicemembers and Veterans with severe service-connected disabilities who:
Received Specially Adapted Housing (SAH) grant to help build, remodel, or purchase a home, AND
Have the title to the home, AND
Have a mortgage on the home
Veterans must apply for VMLI before their 70th birthday.
Benefits
VMLI provides up to $200,000 mortgage life insurance and is payable only to the mortgage holder (i.e., a bank or mortgage lender), not to a beneficiary. The amount of coverage will equal the amount of the mortgage still owed, but the maximum can never exceed $200,000. VMLI is decreasing term insurance which reduces as the mortgage balance declines. VMLI has no loan or cash values and does not pay dividends.
Over-redemption Insurance (also sometimes called Over-redemption Coverage) is a type of insurance that is purchased by businesses to protect themselves financially in the event that a promotion ends up becoming more successful than was originally anticipated and/or budgeted for. Over-redemption insurance is commonly used by retailers, advertising agencies and brand managers to reduce the financial risk of a running a marketing or sales promotion.

§How Over-redemption Insurance works[edit]
Since it is difficult to predict how successful a company's promotion will end up becoming, unexpected costs can easily accumulate if both the cost and success of the promotion are underestimated. With over-redemption insurance, if a company goes over the promotional budget they had originally planned for, the financial risk of those increased costs gets transferred to the insurer, thus protecting the company's budget.

§How Over-redemption Insurance is rated[edit]
Insurance companies rate over-redemption insurance based upon a number of factors. These factors include, but are not limited to: what type of company is requesting the insurance and how long they've been in business, if the promotion is new or being renewed, the duration which the promotion is being held, the target area of the product, the number of units sold, the cost per unit, the number of units the company will be using during the promotion, the monetary value of the coupon, whether or not any advertising costs are applicable, previous promotions and/or redemptions results, and of course, the desired amount of insurance that the client is requesting.

An example of over-redemption insurance would be if a company is running a promotion in which consumers must collect a certain number of proofs of purchase from a yogurt lid in order to receive a $100 prize. The company may predict a 20% response rate (i.e. 20% of all consumers will participate in the promotion and actively collect the yogurt lids). In case the promotion ends up becoming vastly more popular than the company initially intended, they may call an insurance company to purchase the coverage, paying a premium to cover unforeseen promotional costs, if the promotion reaches a response rate above 20%. A company may choose to either purchase coverage for up to the full 100% response rate, from 20–50% response, or coverage as their budget allows.

When Too Much of a Good Thing Can Hurt You

The greatest challenge with redemption offers is managing the budget; you never really know how many people will take advantage of your offer. As a result, you can only ‘guesstimate’ what consumer response will be, set aside budget reserves (if your CFO allows it) and then cross your fingers and hope for the best. The key to running a lucrative offer is striking that optimal balance between the budget and the value of an offer that will attract and motivate consumers to make purchases at a desired volume. Redemption Insurance can help do that.

Rest Easy Knowing You’re Covered

Redemption Insurance limits the financial risk associated with higher-than-anticipated consumer responses/claims, and benefits you in many ways.

- A secure risk-transfer solution backed 100% by top-rated insurers
- Guaranteed to protect your budgets and balance sheets
- Eliminates the need to set aside budget reserves for unexpected over-redemption
- Enables you to go to market with high-impact promotional offers that will drive consumers to purchase
- Allows you to launch those large scale brand offers – across multiple product lines – with peace-of-mind

Eliminate the Financial Risk

Insuring a redemption offer is not that much different than insuring your house or car. The end result is simple: if there are too many responses or claims, we pay, not you.
To repay the balance on a mortgage loan in case the mortgagor dies before payoff, one buys this type of decreasing-term life insurance policy.
To repay the balance on a mortgage loan in case the mortgagor dies before payoff, one buys this type of decreasing-term life insurance policy.

To repay the ballance on a mortgage loan in case the mortgagor dies before payoff, one buys this type of decreasing term life insurance policy.
insurance upon the life of a mortgagor providing for payment of any unpaid balance of the mortgage loan at the insured's death
Case Study: Coupon Over-Redemption Insurance
A Fortune 500 company decided to run a promotion highlighting one of its product lines. The terms of the promotion were simple: purchase a certain amount of the specified items and receive a certificate in the mail for a future purchase of similar items.
The marketing department expected a small response rate based on prior programs and budgeted accordingly. With Marsh's assistance, the client also purchased over-redemption insurance in case the program was more successful than anticipated, thus capping their bottom-line cost and transferring the risk to the insurance company. While the client was responsible up to the amount of the deductible, the insurance company would pay for all redemptions exceeding this amount up to a $1 million limit.
The in-store promotion ran for two months and required consumers to write in for the certificate, showing a proof of purchase. Upon receiving the certificate by mail, consumers had four months to redeem the coupon at the same store.
Contrary to historical data, the promotion was extremely successful and substantially over-redeemed. However, the client benefited from Marsh's ability to transfer this unexpected and unbudgeted expense to the insurance market.
ver Redemption Insurance and Fixed Fee Solutions

Over Redemption Insurance or Fixed Fee Solutions can be used to limit the financial liability associated with a Sales Promotion.  Money-off Coupons, Trial Offers, 2 for 1 and other promotional sales incentives are a great way to encourage sales.

Unfortunately the better the marketing idea and the more successful your promotional offer is, the more expensive the cost will be.  Over Redemption Insurance enables you to fix your marketing budget, without the risk of a huge outlay if it over redeems beyond your expectations.

In return for an insurance premium we accept the risk of any redemptions that occur over a trigger point, agreed prior to the start of the sales incentive.  You can then enjoy a successful promotion with having to watch your marketing budget disappear!

Fixed Fee Contracts work in a similar way to over redemption insurance, but provide additional benefits.  WorldWide Special Risks’ Fixed Fee solution takes responsibility for the entire promotional incentive, from the ground up, in return for a single fixed fee.

In addition we will also provide advice and assistance in the planning stages, review the promotions terms and conditions,  provide redemption handling and customer service support.
Promotion Protection Insurance
Overview
Prize indemnity insurance covers contingent prizes on behalf of sponsors or promoters. Prize insurance allows the sponsor / promoter / organizer to offer a large, risk-free prize for only a fraction of the cost. Some examples include probability-based prizes such as drawing the correct envelope, dice rolls, spinning a wheel, etc., and skill-based prizes such as sinking a 60-foot putt, shooting a basketball from half-court or making a field goal from a certain distance.

Over-redemption insurance allows a marketer / sponsor to transfer the risk of a coupon or free product offer that is “too successful.” Sponsors / marketers often will distribute coupons, “buy one, get one free” or multi-purchase benefits to increase awareness and sales of their products. Our coverage allows sponsors to protect themselves against an unexpected high redemption of those coupons.

Contractual bonus insurance is coverage that is purchased mostly by corporate sponsors to give professional athletes an additional financial incentive in their contract to achieve a certain result. For example, a professional golfer could earn an extra $500,000 for every major championship that he / she wins, in which case, the risk of the additional $500,000 would be transferred to an insurance policy.

Promotion bonds, also known as game of chance surety bonds, are required in Florida and New York for any game of chance promotion over $5,000 in retail value. The promotion must be bonded and registered with their office. Rhode Island requires only a registration for any retail promotion over $500. No other states require these promotions to be bonded. HCC Specialty can streamline this entire process through our online system called Insta-Bond.

Promotion marketing agency E&O is a form of professional liability insurance that provides protection for the agency's wrongful acts or those of others such as subcontractors, for which the agency is legally liable. It is catered specifically to promotion agencies and printers to address their unique legal liability exposures. Coverage applies to the agency’s professional services performed for others for a fee, including advertising services, public relations activities (press releases, publicity articles, personal appearances and promotional broadcasts and telecasts), marketing activities (direct mail marketing and sales promotions activities), advertising and publicity or promotion (contests, sweepstakes and games) of any kind. Unlike most miscellaneous E&O and advertiser liability policies, our policy will cover claims that arise from the over-redemption of coupons, premium, prizes or other valuable consideration for a promotion as a result of printing, production or other error on game materials related to the promotion.

Summary of Coverage
Prize indemnity insurance
Games of skill for sporting-related contests can be quoted through our online TotalEvent® system which includes coverage for basketball half-court shots and parlays, football tosses and field goal kicks, hockey slot shots and golf putting and hole-in-one contests
Games of chance such as dice roll games, spin-the-wheel games, the lucky envelope game and more
Over-redemption insurance
Contractual bonus insurance
Promotion bonds
Promotion marketing agency E&O
Target Insureds
Integrated marketing agencies
Retailers
Athletic organizations
Golf courses
Nonprofit organizations
Standard Limits
Limits vary by promotion
Types of Endowment policies

 With-Profit Endowment

One of the most popular endowment policies sold in the UK is a with-profit endowment. Offered by life assurance companies, with-profit endowments pay the buyer a fixed sum (called the basic sum assured), in addition to earnings from investments made by the company. The basic sum assured plus the investment profits are paid after a predetermined length of time, as long as the policy holder has also been consistent with the monthly payments they agreed upon.

There are two options offered for with-profit endowments:

Full With-Profit Endowment – includes a guarantee for the full value of the loan by the end of the maturity period. Usually more costly, it also offers the policy holder the lowest level of risk because whatever happens, they still recover at least the whole amount of the mortgage loan, plus bonuses if the company’s investments turned out to be profitable for the duration of the endowment’s maturity period.

“Low-cost” With-Profit Endowment – does not come with a guarantee for the full value of the loan. Rather, only a portion of the mortgage loan amount is assured of being returned to the policy holder by the end of the policy’s maturity period. This is the less expensive option if you can deal with the higher level of risk. When the endowment matures, profits from the company’s investment are added to the lump sum (through a bonus system) to recover the rest of the loan’s value.

 Low Start Endowment

A low start endowment features smaller initial premiums that progressively get higher over time until the endowment matures. Payments are usually at their highest by the last 15 years of the policy.

First time homeowners find low start endowments attractive because it allows them to match their expenditure with the starting level of their income and then lets it grow in pace with their (ideally) upward financial mobility.

 Non-profit endowment

A non-profit endowment, as the name suggests, has no stock investment component. It is not designed to pay off a mortgage; rather it is bought for the life cover it provides. As such, it is not a very popular choice for endowments as most buyers purchase endowments in order to help them pay off their mortgage loans.

Unitised with-profit endowment

Another form of with-profit endowment, the unit rates are calculated annually and then guaranteed in order to establish a minimum income “floor”, no matter what the actual market conditions are for the rest of the year. By doing this, any impact from a fluctuating market is minimized and it keeps the level of risk very low for the policy holder.


An endowment policy is a life insurance contract designed to pay a lump sum after a specific term (on its 'maturity') or on death. Typical maturities are ten, fifteen or twenty years up to a certain age limit. Some policies also pay out in the case of critical illness.

Policies are typically traditional with-profits or unit-linked (including those with unitised with-profits funds).

Endowments can be cashed in early (or surrendered) and the holder then receives the surrender value which is determined by the insurance company depending on how long the policy has been running and how much has been paid into it.

Contents  [hide] 
1 Traditional With Profits Endowments
2 Unit-linked endowment
3 Full endowments
4 Low cost endowment (LCE)
5 Traded endowments
6 Modified endowments (U.S.)
§Traditional With Profits Endowments[edit]
There is an amount guaranteed to be paid out called the sum assured and this can be increased on the basis of investment performance through the addition of periodic (for example annual) bonuses. Regular bonuses (sometimes referred to as reversionary bonuses) are guaranteed at maturity and a further non-guarantee bonus may be paid at the end known as a terminal bonus. During adverse investment conditions, the encashment value or surrender value may be reduced by a 'Market Value Reduction' or MVR (It is sometime referred to as a market value adjustment but this is a term in decline through pressure from the Financial Conduct Authority to use clearer terms). The idea of such a measure is to protect the investors who remain in the fund from others withdrawing funds with notional values that are, or risk being, in excess of the value of underlying assets at a time when stock markets are low. If an MVA applies an early surrender would be reduced according to the policies adopted by the funds managers at the time.

§Unit-linked endowment[edit]
Unit-linked endowments are investments where the premium is invested in units of a unitised insurance fund. Units are encashed to cover the cost of the life assurance. Policyholders can often choose which funds their premiums are invested in and in what proportion. Unit prices are published on a regular basis and the encashment value of the policy is the current value of the units. This is the simplest definition.

Another definition: -It is a Life Insurance Policy whose value is expressed in terms of numbers of units it holds and the prices of those units ; for example, a fund with 1000 units @ £10 each unit gives a fund value of £10,000. -The Policy Holder chooses where to invest and he bears most of the risk. -A number of charges is deducted from the fund on a regular basis. -Accumulated policy value depend on the fund performance.

§Full endowments[edit]
A full endowment is a with-profits endowment where the basic sum assured is equal to the death benefit at start of policy and, assuming growth, the final payout would be much higher than the sum assured.

§Low cost endowment (LCE)[edit]
A low cost endowment is a medley of: an endowment where an estimated future growth rate will meet a target amount and a decreasing life insurance element to ensure that the target amount will be paid out as a minimum if death occurs (or a critical illness is diagnosed if included).

The main thing of a low cost endowment has been for endowment mortgages to pay off interest only mortgage at maturity or earlier death in favour of full endowment with the required premium would be much higher.

§Traded endowments[edit]
Main article: Endowment selling
Traded Endowment Policies (TEPs) or Second Hand Endowment Policies (SHEPs) are conventional (sometimes referred to as traditional) with-profits endowments that have been sold to a new owner part way through their term. The TEP market enables buyers (investors) to buy unwanted endowment policies for more than the surrender value offered by the insurance company. Investors will pay more than the surrender value because the policy has greater value if it is kept in force than if it is terminated early.

When a policy is sold, all beneficial rights on the policy are transferred to the new owner. The new owner takes on responsibility for future premium payments and collects the maturity value when the policy matures or the death benefit when the original life assured dies. Policyholders who sell their policies no longer benefit from the life cover and should consider whether to take out alternative cover.

The TEP market deals almost exclusively with conventional With Profits policies. The easiest way of determining whether an endowment policy is in this category is to check to see whether your policy document mentions units, indicating it is a Unitised With Profits or Unit Linked policy. If bonuses are in sterling and there is no mention of units then it is probably a conventional With Profits endowment policy. The other types of policies - “Unit Linked” and “Unitised With Profits” have a performance factor which is dependent directly on current investment market conditions. These are not usually tradable as the guarantees on the policy are often much lower, and the discount between the surrender value and Asset Share (the true underlying value) is narrower.

§Modified endowments (U.S.)[edit]
Modified endowments were created in the Technical Corrections Act of 1988 (H.R 4333, S. 2238) in response to single-premium life (endowments) being used as tax shelters. The Act of 1988 established the 7-Pay Test, which is a stipulated premium that would create a guaranteed paid up policy within 7 years from policy inception. If premiums paid to the contract go beyond (i.e. are higher than) the premium amount stipulated then the contract has failed the 7-Pay Test and is reclassified as a Modified Endowment Contract. The following new tax rules apply to Modified Endowment Contracts:

Distributions will switch from a First In First Out (FIFO) basis to a Last In First Out (LIFO) basis. This means that withdrawals will require the policy owner to withdraw taxable gain before withdrawing untaxable basis.

Policy loans will be realized as ordinary income to the policy owner and could be subject to income taxes in the year the loan is made.

Distributions (either withdrawals or loans) that go beyond the policy basis will be subject to a 10% penalty tax for policy owners under the age of 59.5 (this can be avoided by the use of a 72(v) distribution)

Once a contract has violatrevocable. Transferring funds from a Modified Endowment Contract to a new life insurance policy via the 1035 exchange privilege will render the newly issued contract as Modified Endowment Contract as well.
The Pros Of An Endowment Life Insurance Policy
Endowment life insurance is a specialized insurance product that's often dressed up as a college savings plan. These policies couple term life insurance with a savings program. As the policyholder, you choose how much you want to save each month and when you want the policy to mature. Based on your monthly contributions, you're guaranteed a certain payout, called an endowment, when the policy matures. You can then use this endowment for your child's college tuition, fees, books, living expenses and other costs. If you should die before the policy matures, your child will receive the payout as your death benefit and will still have the anticipated money for college.
The endowment life insurance policy promises a risk-free, guaranteed return on a guaranteed date as long as you make the fixed monthly payments. What's more, it isn't counted against your child's financial aid eligibility. Could this be the college savings plan you've been looking for? Let's look at whether the stated advantages of these policies live up to their promises.

You Get Two Products for the Price of One
Marketing materials for endowment life insurance might make it seem like you're saving money by bundling products, but that's not the case. Term life insurance, the type included in an endowment life policy, is inexpensive if you're young and healthy. If you broke up your monthly payment to the endowment life policy and used part of it for college savings and part of it for term insurance, you would get more college savings and more insurance for the same amount of money. Endowment life insurance is certainly not the only life insurance product that combines savings with insurance. However, if your primary goal is to accumulate savings, these types of policies usually aren't the best option because not all of your money is going toward your goal of saving money. Some of it is going toward buying insurance.

It's Risk Free
Endowment life insurance policies do not have investment risk or interest rate risk. But when you choose incredibly safe investments, they usually offer incredibly low returns. Playing it this safe means you won't accumulate enough savings to pay for college. In fact, your savings may not even keep up with inflation, especially since the earnings on endowment life insurance policies are taxable. There are two better options than an endowment life policy, however, and they both allow you to minimize your risk. The first is a prepaid tuition plan, which lets you lock in today's tuition prices for future education expenses. This plan eliminates the risk that you won't have the money for your child's education when the time comes by allowing you to pay for it well in advance. It should also greatly reduce the cost of that education.

The second better option is a college savings plan, where you can choose how much investment risk to take. Ideally, you would invest a portion of your savings in stocks and a portion in bonds, gradually moving away from stocks as your child approaches college age. This strategy is similar to how you save for retirement - you take more risk at the beginning when you have a long time horizon, and as the day when you will need the money approaches, you move into lower-risk investments to make sure the money you need will be there when it's time to spend it. If you're truly risk averse and are willing to accept lower returns, you can also avoid investment risk with FDIC-insured money market accounts, savings accounts and CDs. Regardless of the investment you choose, a college savings plan will help maximize your returns by minimizing your tax liability.


It Doesn't Count Against Financial Aid Eligibility
Scott Anderson, president of eduLaunchpad.com, says 529 plans and education savings accounts effectively lose 5.6% of their value when students go to college. The FAFSA takes this money into account and increases the student's expected college contribution by up to 5.6%. It's important to understand how your savings and investment decisions will affect your child's financial aid eligibility so that you don't anticipate aid you won't qualify to receive, and it's true that endowment life insurance doesn't count against a student's financial aid eligibility the way other college savings vehicles do. This "advantage" isn't a good reason to choose an endowment life insurance policy,. Even after the 5.6% hit they take, 529 plans and ESAs when used wisely will give you more bang for your college investment buck than endowment life insurance can.

You Don't Need a Medical Exam
Unlike many life insurance policies, you don't need to submit to a medical exam to qualify for an endowment life insurance policy. For example, to obtain the Gerber Life College Fund policy, a medical exam isn't required unless you're 51 or older and applying for $101,000 or more in coverage. This advantage means an endowment life insurance policy could look like a good option if you have a medical history that would prevent you from qualifying for an exam-contingent policy. It's also good news if you'd simply rather avoid the time and unpleasantness of the exam and its associated questions about your medical history. However, you can also take out an ordinary term policy without an exam. This feature isn't unique to endowment life policies. Keep in mind, though, that with any no-exam life insurance, the policy's face value will be relatively small - enough to help a little, but probably not enough to meet every need you're trying to provide for.

It Forces You to Save for College
Unlike a 529 plan or Coverdell ESA, endowment life insurance it isn't really a college savings plan - it's just marketed that way. It's really just life insurance, and the payout can be used for anything, without penalty. Manulife Financial, one of the largest life insurance companies in the world, doesn't mince words on its website. It says that endowment life insurance "provides a systematic way of saving for people who are extravagant."

No financial product can fully protect you from yourself if you're extravagant. For example, you can take a loan out against your endowment life policy, and if you do, your benefit will be reduced by the outstanding loan amount and by the interest you owe on that loan. You also won't receive the entire benefit if you don't pay your premiums in full, and if you stop paying your premiums, the policy will lapse. Because of these options, endowment life insurance really doesn't offer any protection against bad spending choices you or your child might make.

The Bottom Line
Endowment life insurance policies sound like a great way to save for college, but they pale in comparison to your other options. They don't offer enough insurance or enough college savings to meet most people's needs, and they don't give you the most bang for your buck.

Let Insurance Be Your Peace of Mind 
Do you know the 4 Types of Insurance Everyone Needs? Investopedia’s FREE Personal Finance newsletter provides the knowledge and information you need to make the best financial decisions. Click here to get this weekly guide and start learning how to prepare for life’s unexpected surprises.
Life insurance policy that pays the assured sum (face amount) on a fixed date or upon the death of the insured, whichever comes earlier. Endowment policies carry premiums higher than those on conventional whole life policies and term insurance, but are useful in meeting special lump sum needs such as college expenses or for buying a retirement home. Also called endowment life policy or endowment policy.
Endowment policies

An endowment policy is an investment product that you buy from a life assurance company. They are set up as regular savings plans and at the end of a set period pay out a lump sum. The policy includes life assurance, so it will also pay out if you die during the term.

An endowment policy regular savings plan may be beneficial for you if you:

Want to save for a particular event or goal over the long term, usually at least ten years
Understand that the value of your investment can go down as well as up and you may get back less than you invested
Want to receive a non-guaranteed lump sum at the end of your investment term
How are endowment policy regular savings plans used?

Top Tip
If you don’t understand a financial product get independent financial advice before you buy.

People may use endowment policies for the following reasons:

A specific savings goal
General investment
Interest-only mortgages – at one time these types of endowments were a very common way of saving to pay off an interest-only mortgage, but that is no long the case
How they work

You make monthly or annual payments.
Part of your monthly payment is used to buy life assurance. How much depends on your age, sex, and how long the endowment is for.
The rest of your payment is invested either on a with-profits basis or a unit-linked basis (see ‘How your money is invested’ below). The size of the lump sum you get at the end of your endowment often depends on the performance of these investments.
The size of the lump sum you get at the end of your endowment often depends on the performance of these investments.
Get money saving tips straight to your inbox

Join 100,000+ subscribers to get our free newsletter packed with tips and advice.

Enter your email address
 Sign up now
Privacy promise: We will never share your data or spam you.
How your money is invested

Your money may be invested on a with-profits basis. This means your savings are pooled with other investors’ money and invested by the insurance company in a range of different investments, typically including shares, fixed-interest investments and property. This pool is used to meet the costs of running the insurer’s business and then what’s left over (the profits) are shared with you and the other investors by declaring bonuses that increase the value of your policy. Find out more about With-profits funds.

Alternatively, you can choose policies where you invest on a unit-linked basis. It’s then up to you to decide how you want to invest your money by choosing from a range of different investment funds. These may be funds run by the life insurance company or they might be a range of unit trusts and open-ended investment companies (OEICs) run by separate companies. You can switch between different funds, if you want to, without cashing in your policy – the first one or two switches are often free but there may be charges if you switch more often.

Find out more about investment funds.

See our guide Unit Trusts and OEICs.

Risk and return

Endowment policies guarantee to pay back a certain minimum amount provided they are held to the end of the term (unless they are unit linked) or death.
The value of with-profits investments is designed to grow steadily as bonuses are added. Usually bonuses, once added, can’t be taken away. But if you cash in your policy before the end of the term, some of the bonuses might be clawed back through a special charge (called the Market Value Reduction, MVR, or Market Value Adjustment, MVA).
The value of your unit-linked investments can go down as well as up and you may get back less than you invested. Growth will depend on the performance of the funds you choose. By choosing funds that invests in a variety of investment types, you can weather the ups and downs of the market better. Find out more about Diversifying – the smart way to save and invest.
Access to your money

Your money is not easily accessible until the end of the policy term.
If you do want to end your policy early, you’ll probably have to pay high charges and penalties.
If you already have an endowment policy and are thinking of ending it early, learn more about your options from our guide Ending your with-profits policy early

Charges

There may be an administration fee deducted from each of your regular payments.
If you invest on a with-profits basis, various costs and charges are deducted from the investment fund before bonuses are worked out. You can ask the company for a guide explaining how bonuses are worked out.
If you invest on a unit-linked basis, there will be a variety of charges deducted from each fund.

It’s also important to understand any exit charges. Endowments are a long-term investment, and you may have to pay charges and penalties if you want to get out early.

Read more about Understanding investment fees
Safe and secure?

Your money is secure except in the unlikely event of the insurance company going bust. Read the Financial Services Compensation Scheme.

You cannot claim compensation simply because the value of your investment falls.

Tax

The tax you pay on your endowment policy will depend on your circumstances. Find out more about the Tax advantages of qualifying life insurance investment products.

Where to get an endowment policy

You can buy endowment policies through a financial adviser or directly from an insurance company.

Before you take out an endowment policy you should get a ‘Key Features’ document that explains the advantages and disadvantages of the product. If you’re still not sure if endowment policies are right for you, it’s best to get financial advice. There may be an alternative that’s better for you.
Endowment vs. Whole Life Insurance
Endowments and whole life policies are two different types of permanent life insurance. Both accumulate cash value, unlike term life insurance, so policyholders feel they are getting some of their premiums "back".
Both types of policies pay a lump sum of money either to beneficiaries upon the insured's death or back to the living policyholder when the policy's term matures. The difference is that endowments have a shorter coverage period and mature sooner, usually in 10 to 20 years. Whole life policies are designed to last for the insured's whole life, so they mature when the insured policyholder reaches the age of 95 or 100. It is less likely for whole life policies to mature.
Endowments typically have high monthly premiums — the shorter the endowment term, the higher the premiums — while whole life policies often have relatively lower monthly or annual premiums. Whole life premiums are higher than term life insurance premiums, of course, because only part of the premium goes towards insurance, while some of it is invested for future returns to be paid upon maturity. Depending on the type of endowment or whole life policy, both can combine savings and investment strategies, and endowment policies are frequently marketed as college savings plans.
The definition of an endowment policy is an insurance policy where the policyholder receives money after a certain timeframe or his or her beneficiaries receive the money if he or she passes away during the timeframe.
An example of an endowment policy is one in which a charity receives a man's money a year after the man passes away.
an insurance policy by which a stated amount is paid to the insured after the period of time specified in the contract, or to the beneficiaries in case the insured dies within the time specified
a life assurance savings scheme designed to pay out a lump sum when the policy matures
attributive form of endowment policy, noun.
What is endowment life insurance?
An endowment policy will pay out returns whether the policyholder dies before maturity (risk benefit) or the policy term ends during the policyholder’s lifetime (maturity benefit). In either case, the insurance company will pay the option chosen by the policyholder.
Who can benefit from an endowment policy?
Everyone who is looking for solid insurance protection and also wants to be able to save up for their future.
Everyone who prefers stable, secure and calculable returns over risky investments that may or may not produce higher yields.
Everyone who is looking for a simple, transparent life insurance policy that requires little care from the policyholder during the term of the insurance.
Everyone who needs an affordable, high-value savings plan combined with insurance coverage that comes with a low monthly premium of as little as HUF 7,000.
What are the added benefits of Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance?
Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance is the only endowment policy available in Hungary that covers disability due to an accident or critical illnesses (cancer, heart attack, stroke, etc.) in addition to standard coverage in the event of death, without the need for a rider.
Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance is also unique in that it covers against as many as 25 critical illnesses, including cases of malignant tumor, heart attack, stroke, bypass operation, chronic kidney failure, vital organ transplant, loss of vision or hearing, third-degree burn, multiple sclerosis, limb amputation, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and coma.
Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance offers unique flexibility by giving the policyholder the option to freely choose the amount of the risk benefit in cases of death, disability and critical illness as well as the amount of the maturity benefit, independent of each other, thereby adjusting the insurance to the policyholder’s personal needs.
Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance policies can be signed without the need for prior medical and health risk analysis, which makes the application process much easier as it practically eliminates the risk of the application being rejected.
To account for future events unforeseeable at the time of signing the contract, Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance is adjusted to the current financial condition of the insured allowing policyholders to freely lower or raise their premium, or pay lump sums into their account.
Finally, as a key benefit Pannónia Endowment Life Insurance offers extremely low premiums to policy owner of all ages compared to competitors.
Note: The information above contains the key features of Pannónia Life Insurance; however, the description is not complete. Please read the terms and conditions carefully before signing a contract, and contact a skilled insurance adviser for professional advice.Endowment Life Insurance
A term life insurance policy whereby the insurance company agrees to pay the death benefit when the policyholder reaches a certain age. For example, rather than waiting for death to actually occur, the company may pay the death benefit when the policyholder turns 100 years old. Because the insurance company will pay the death benefit whether or not the policyholder dies in the designated period of time, premiums on endowment life insurance are high.What is an endowment policy?
An endowment policy offers life insurance cover with a savings policy. The policy exists for an agreed term, the minimum usually being 10 years, but can be for as long as 15 or 20 years up to a certain age limit. These days an endowment policy is usually taken out as a life insurance contract designed to pay a lump sum after a specified term (i.e. to repay a mortgage) or upon death. Some policies also pay out in the case of critical illness.

A cash sum is paid out at the end of the policy term (on 'maturity'), or in the event of the earlier death of the policyholder This will either be a predetermined sum (in the event of death) or an agreed capital sum on maturity. You could also arrange a 'With-Profits endowment, where bonuses are added to the policy, usually annually, and once added are guaranteed.

This type of policy has traditionally been used to repay an interest-only mortgage, but is not as popular now. On maturity the amount payable is the sum assured plus annual and terminal bonuses that have been allocated during the life of the policy.

A unit-linked endowment is similar in that it's a life assurance based plan, but premiums are invested in one or more of the insurance company's investment funds, which allows for a more flexible approach. This may be a higher risk type of plan than a With-Profits endowment.

A low cost endowment policy does not guarantee to repay a mortgage. However, most reputable life insurers will check the performance of the policy during the term, usually ten years before maturity, five years before maturity and then annually to ensure that it's on target to provide the required sum. If a shortfall is likely, they will inform the policyholder of what action to take or the options that are available.How does life insurance cover work?
Life cover is a type of insurance that pays out a lump sum or income if you die while the policy is still in force.

Most commonly life insurance cover is taken to ensure your mortgage will be repaid, so that your family can afford to continue to live in your home. You might also set up a policy to protect your loved ones; for instance, to provide enough money for your family until your youngest child reaches adulthood.

Life insurance is usually for a set term – to coincide with the length of your mortgage, or a life event (your youngest child’s 21st birthday, for example). If you die within the term, the policy will pay out; however, if you survive the term, you don’t get anything back.

The cost of your life insurance policy can be paid monthly or annually.  Be sure to keep up your payments – if you miss one, your policy may be placed “off risk” which means you’ll have no cover. Life insurance providers sometimes offer a “premium waiver” which pays your premiums if you can’t work due to ill health.Prudential Endowment Savings

Your endowment policy is a life insurance contract designed to pay a lump sum after a specified term (on its 'maturity') or on earlier death.
Endowments can be used as a savings vehicle to provide a lump sum to fund a specific event in the future or more commonly, used for endowment mortgages to pay off interest only mortgages at maturity or earlier death.
How can I find the value of my policy?

If you are still paying premiums of your policy, each year you will receive an annual bonus statement which will tell you how your policy is performing. If you want to find out the current value your policy, please contact us.
How will I know if my policy will meet the target amount?

We send you an annual bonus statement that details the performance of your policy. If you are a mortgage endowment customer you will also receive a yearly review letter which tells you whether the policy is on track to meet its target amount. These letters are colour coded red, amber and green.
Green - your policy is on track to meet its target amount at maturity.
Amber - your policy is at significant risk of not meeting its target amount at maturity.
Red - there is a high risk that your policy will not reach its target amount at maturity.
What if my policy has a shortfall?

If the value of your fund is less than the sum required to meet and repay the target amount, you will need to make up the difference from other sources.
Alternative mortgage arrangements include, switching to a repayment mortgage, starting an additional savings plan or extending or increasing premiums on your existing plan where permitted.
The Money Advice Service has produced a guide to help people who may be facing a financial shortfall. You can request a copy of this guide by calling the Money Advice Service helpline on 0300 500 5000 or by visiting https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/
Can I surrender my policy?

Yes, but before you think about cashing in your plan, please take time to read this leaflet as you may wish to consider some of the other choices available to you.
How can I sell my policy?

Not all endowments are suitable for trading; we can tell you if your plan is suitable and help you find out more through the Association of Policy Market Makers (APMM).
APMM is an association representing a number of independent market makers. Market makers sell suitable policies to new owners who buy second hand plans as an investment.
APMM are authorised and regulated by the FSA.
You can contact APMM on 0845 643 5124 or visit their website www.apmm.org
APMM do not cover the whole market, there are other market makers and you are free to look into trading directly with them.
Review your Prudential Endowment Savings plan

We send you a statement each year but you can also request a fund valuation online.
To make any changes, or find out more about your plan call 0845 640 2000, Mon-Fri 8am - 6pm, or write to: Prudential, Lancing, BN15 8GB quoting your Policy number. Or you can send us a secure email.
pure endowment
An endowment payable at the end of the policy period if the insured is alive. If the insured has died, there is nothing paid in the form of benefits.What is PURE ENDOWMENT?
An endowment policy that is paid when the person in the endowment is still alive. An endowment policy runs for a set number of years than matures and is paid out to the person nominated.An endowment that is only paid if the designated payee is still living at the end of the predetermined endowment period.
life insurance policy under which its face value is payable only if the insured survives to the end of the stated endowment period; no benefit is paid if the insured dies during the endowment period. Few if any of these policies are sold today.A pure-endowment contract promises to pay the insured value in case the holder survives a certain fixed period. Thus, a ten-year pure endowment issued at age 45 will pay the holder the amount named in the contract if he be living ten years from the date of issue. The mortality table shows that 74,173 persons are living at age 45, and that 64,563 are still living at age 55, leaving 9,610 as the number dying during the ten years. A policy thus insuring against survival during this period must itself provide 64563/74173 of the amount of the contract at the end of the period. Or it may be stated in this way: the probability insured against is 64563/74173 and since the money paid as a single premium will be held ten years before the policy matures the formula for determining the net single premium is: 64563/74173 X 1000 X .744094 = $647.69

The decimal, .744094, is the present value of one dollar discounted for ten years at 3 percent.

A clear distinction must be made between a pure endowment and a savings-bank account which is left to accumulate at an agreed rate of interest. The insured cannot get possession of the money invested in a pure endowment before the expiration of the endowment period. If he should die during this period all the money paid is lost, i.e. it goes to swell the fund which will be paid to the survivors. A savings-bank account on the other hand is not lost through death of the investor. This fact makes it possible to divide the $1,000 which will be paid in case of survival through the endowment period into two funds, one of which might be called the investment fund, and the other the speculative fund. The investment fund in a ten-year pure endowment, issued at age 45, will equal $647.69 plus interest compounded for the ten years at 3 percent, thus:

647.69 X 1.3439 = $870.43

This $870.43 is the amount which would be obtained by investing the net single premium of this pure endowment policy at 3 percent, interest for ten years. The remainder of the $1,000, or $129.57, comprises the survivor's share of the amounts forfeited by those policyholders who died before their policies matured. The latter amount is here called the speculative fund. The possibility of thus losing the entire amount of one's investment by death before the endowment period has expired, makes the pure endowment a policy that finds little favor with the insuring public. For this reason it is usually combined with, or constitutes a feature of some other kind of policy.
ENDOWMENT ASSURANCE PLAN DEFINITION
The most common type of plans available in the market with guaranteed returns are called Endowment Plans. This plan is actually called Endowment Assurance Plans. It is hence a combination of Pure Term Plan and Pure Endowment Plan. Pure Term plan has ONLY Death Benefit with no Maturity Benefit, whereas Pure Endowment Plans have ONLY Maturity Benefit with no Death Benefit. However, Endowment Assurance Plans have Death Benefit if the Life Assured dies within the policy term as well as Maturity Benefit if he survives till the policy matures. Hence it is a complete win-win situation for the policyholder.
 
In Endowment Plans, benefit paid either on death or maturity whichever occurs earlier. Thus if the Life Insured dies within the policy term, the nominee gets the Sum Assured as the Death Benefit and the policy terminates thereafter. However, if the Life Insured survives till the end, then he gets the Maturity Benefit as guaranteed at the policy inception.
 
There are many types of Endowment Plans. Money Back Plans or Anticipated Endowment Plans are also a variety of the same. There are Marriage Endowment Plans, Educational Endowment Plans, etc. Child Plans are also a type of Endowment Plans.
 
Endowment Assurance Plans are offered by companies with Profit i.e. the customer is given an option to participate in the profits of the company by paying a higher premium and would hence get bonus. This type of plans is called Participating Policies. This type of policies offer bonus to their customers. If policyholders do not opt to participate in the bonus, then it is called Non-Participating Policies.
 
You should compare endowment plans to find the best one for your family.

Who should buy Endowment Plans?
 
The usual customers for this plan would be someone who is the interested in both life cover as well as returns. It is also beneficial for someone who is a risk averse person and wants guaranteed return. It is good for someone who is yet to build up his personal portfolio like a person who has newly joined work. The returns are typically not very high as the investments are mostly in debt instruments which protect capital but offer low returns.
 Anticipated Endowment Anticipated Endowment plans have unique feature where a part of the sum assured is paid at certain intervals during the term of the policy and the balance of the sum assured together with the accrued bonus at maturity. 

The life assured continues enjoying the life cover such that in the event of death at any time during the term of the policy i.e., before the maturity date, full sum assured is payable without any deduction of installments paid earlier.
1. What is term life insurance?
  
Term life insurance provides for the payment of the sum assured only if the life assured dies within a specified period. If the life assured does not die, the policy ceases and the premiums paid are retained by the insurance company. Thus, the premiums paid contain no savings element. As such, term life insurance provides the maximum protection on the life assured for a specified number of years. 
 
Term insurance is regarded as temporary insurance (as opposed to permanent insurance like whole life), and as such, it does not provide any surrender values, paid-up values, loan values or any of the non-forfeiture privileges.
  
This relatively inexpensive form of insurance cover is useful for the following purposes: 
To provide life insurance cover for a short period  
To cover a loan  
To cover the needs of a family in the event of the premature death of the life assured, before a house mortgage is repaid, or while the children are young 
 	Back to Top
 
 
2. What is renewable term insurance? 
  
Renewable term insurance is one in which the policyowner is allowed to renew his/her term policy, when it expires, for another term policy, irrespective of the insured's state of health at the time of renewal. 
 
The premium payable is level during the term of each renewal and it will increase at the next renewal based on the attained age of the insured at the time of renewal.
 
Like all term policies, there are neither surrender values, paid-up values, loan values nor non-forfeiture privileges.
This relatively inexpensive form of insurance cover is useful for the following purposes: 
To provide life insurance cover for a short period  
To cover a loan  
To cover the needs of a family in the event of the premature death of the life assured, before a house mortgage is repaid, or while the children are young 
 	Back to Top
 
 
3. What is level term insurance? 
  
Level term insurance is one in which the sum insured of the policy remains the same throughout the term of the policy. Should the life assured die at any time during the term of the policy, the fixed sum assured will be payable. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
4. What is convertible term insurance? 
  
Convertible term insurance is one in which the life insured has the option of converting his/her term policy, at any time during the term of the policy, to a permanent insurance policy such as whole life or endowment without evidence of insurability. 
 
At the time of conversion, the new premium rate will be based on the life assured's then attained age.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
5. What is decreasing or reducing term insurance? 
  
Decreasing or reducing term insurance is one where the sum assured of the policy decreases each year to a zero balance at the end of the term. Sometimes it is a rider which is attached to a permanent insurance policy. 
This type of term insurance is useful when the life assured needs the protection most at the earlier years of the policy. It can also be used as a means of protecting a mortgage.
  
	Back to Top
 

6. What are the types of decreasing term insurance available? 
  
There are generally 2 types of decreasing term insurance available. The first type is concerned with protecting a mortgage or loan. This type of insurance is usually issued as a basic plan and the premium is paid in one lump sum at the onset of the policy.
 
The other type is concerned with providing greater protection in the earlier years of the policy. It is usually issued as a rider on a basic plan and the premium is payable every year, together with the premium of the basic plan of insurance.
  
	Back to Top
 

7. What is mortgage reducing term assurance or insurance? 
  
Mortgage reducing term assurance or insurance is a form of decreasing term insurance whereby the sum assured of the policy decreases in accordance with the loan outstanding. House purchasers usually assign this type of policy to the banks as collateral securities for their housing loans. The policyowner usually pay a single premium for such a policy and the amount is dependent on the principal loan amount, the term of repayment, and the mortgage loan interest rate. At the end of the repayment term, the amount of cover decreases to nil, just as the loan outstanding does the same. Like all term policies, there are no benefits payable at the end of the policy term. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
8. What is group term insurance? 
  
Group term insurance is one that covers several persons under one policy, called a master policy. The individuals insured under this policy are not parties to the contract, although they do have certain rights under the policy. Usually, groups insured under group insurance policies are employer-employee groups. In this type of insured group, the employer is the policyowner and the employees are the insureds. 
 
This type of insurance is usually a yearly renewable term insurance, and the premiums are intended to cover expected benefits and expenses for only the current policy year.
  
	Back to Top
 

9. What are the pros and cons of term insurance?  
  
The pros of term insurance are: 
It provides the most cover for the least premium, compared to whole life and endowment insurances. 
Renewable and convertible term insurances are flexible, and they safeguard the life insured against a sudden loss of insurability.
The cons of term insurance would include: 
It does not offer any surrender, loan, paid-up values and non-forfeiture privileges.  
Underwriters tend to underwrite such applications much more stringently and the non-medical limits are usually lower than that of permanent insurances. 
As it has no savings element, the policyowner receives nothing at the end of the term of the policy.  
	Back to Top
 
 
10. Why buy term life insurance?  
  
The reasons for buying term life insurance are: 
To provide maximum amount of insurance protection for limted period at the lowest cost. 
To protect the family from loss of earnings and to raise the children until they are independent.
To protect the family from debts due to the creditors if the breadwinner dies.
To provide additional death coverage in a pension plan or other forms of superannuation scheme.
 	Back to Top
 
 
11. What is whole life insurance? 
  
Whole life insurance is a contract that theoretically covers the insured and a level premium is payable for life. If the insured dies, the sum assured less any outstanding policy loans are payable to beneficiary. Sometimes the sum assured will be payable when the insured reaches a certain age such as 85, 90 or 100 years. 
 
This is a permanent insurance policy and hence, there are surrender values available. Depending on length of premium payment there are two types of whole life insurance i.e. ordinary whole life and limited payment whole life.
 
 	Back to Top
 

12. What is ordinary whole life insurance? 
  
Ordinary whole life insurance is one where the premiums are payable throughout the lifetime of the life assured. If the life assured dies, the contract provides various settlement options to be payable to the beneficiaries. 
 
After the first few policy years (normally the third), the policy will have accumulated surrender value. The policyowner may then apply for a policy loan (against the surrender value) to meet his/her financial needs. Furthermore, the policy can be converted to a reduced paid-up policy.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
13. What is limited payment whole life insurance? 
  
Limited payment whole life insurance is one in which the premiums are payable for a limited number of years (usually 10, 15, 20, 25 or 30 years). Sometimes, the policy is designed in such a way that premiums payment is not required from his/her retirement date (no matter whether he did retire) onward. After the premium paying period, the policy becomes paid-up for its full amount and no further premiums are required.
 
The purpose of this limited payment is to enable the policyowner to pay up the policy during his/her working lifetime so that after the completion of the specified period, the policy may remain in force without imposing further financial obligations on the policyowner. The premium payable is greater than that of an ordinary whole life insurance policy.
  
	Back to Top
 

14. What is whole life endowment insurance? 
  
Whole life endowment insurance is one where the premiums are payable throughout the lifetime of the insured and guaranteed cash bonuses will be paid at specified intervals while the policy is in force. The cash bonus is usually expressed as a fixed percentage (usually 10% or 15%) of the sum assured of the policy, and is usually payable at the end of each 5th policy year.  
Some companies allow the cash bonus to be paid every 3 years. 
The policyowner may withdraw the bonuses or keep them with the company. The company will pay interest (at a rate to be determined by the company) on the accumulated sum kept with it.
 
The premium payable is higher when compared to the ordinary whole life or limited payment whole life policy. Accordingly, the savings element is also larger, but immediately after the cash bonus is available, the reserve held back decreases substantially and accumulates again until the next cash bonus payment.
  
	Back to Top
 

15. What kind of needs does whole life insurance cover? 
  
The needs that whole life insurance covers include: 
To protect the family in case of the breadwinner's premature death 
To provide a savings fund (for example, the cash value can be used for retirement) 
To provide protection for the lifetime of the policyholder 
To protect the family from debts due to business, mortgage and other creditors if the breadwinner dies 
To provide additional death coverage in a pension plan or other forms of superannuation scheme     
 	Back to Top
 
 
16. What are the advantages and disadvantages of whole life insurance? 
  
The advantages of whole life insurance are: 
It gives the insured maximum permanent protection at moderate cost each year
It is most suitable to the average man/woman of moderate income and who requires considerable family protection with a savings element
It need not be renewed or converted as with some term policies 
It has surrender values, loan values, and paid-up values; in addition, it contains non-forfeiture privileges 
The disadvantages are:
It has a higher premium than that of term insurance
It requires premiums to be paid for the lifetime of the policyholder. This problem can be overcome by purchasing a limited payment whole life policy. However, the premium paying term is still relatively long
If the cash value has been exhausted, the policy will lapse and no more protection will be provided 
 	Back to Top
 
 
17. What is endowment insurance? 
  
Endowment insurance provides for the payment of the sum insured and any accrued bonuses at the maturity of the policy, or on earlier death of the life assured, whichever comes first. Premiums are payable throughout the term of the policy.
 
Theoretically, endowment insurance is made up of a pure endowment insurance (a pure endowment policy is one which pays the face amount of the policy only if the insured survives to the end of the term of the policy) and a term insurance. The pure endowment insurance will pay the sum assured if the insured survives to the end of the endowment period. The term insurance will pay the sum assured if the insured dies during the endowment period. Therefore, it can be said that the endowment insurance is a combination of pure endowment insurance and term insurance.
 
Like whole life policies, endowment policies steadily build up cash values. However, since an endowment policy matures much earlier than a whole life policy, the cash values build up more rapidly. And because of this, the premium payable is higher than that of a whole life policy.
 
This type of policy is a means of systematic saving with life insurance protection during the chosen period. It can be used for many purposes including:
Saving for retirement 
Repayment of a loan 
Repayment of a debt if death occurs before the loan is repaid 
Providing funds for travel or for any future purpose, such as children's education
 	Back to Top
 

18. What are the common endowment life policies? 
  
The common endowment life policies include: 
Those payable in 10, 15, 25, 30 or more years 
Those that cause the policy to mature at certain ages such as 55, 60 or 65 
Those that cater for juveniles, especially for educational purposes 
Those that are written for a short term, especially for savings purposes 
Those that are written for a long term, especially for protection purposes and to provide for old age.  
 	Back to Top
 
 
19. What is anticipated endowment?  
  
An anticipated endowment is an endowment policy with guaranteed cash payments payable to the policyowner at regular intervals during the term of the policy. The full sum assured will still be payable should the insured die during the term of the policy. However, if the insured survives till the end of the term, then he/she will receive only the balance of the sum assured (usually 50% of the original sum assured).
 
This type of endowment allows the policyowner to receive payments earlier. This is in contrast to the normal endowment policy in which the policyowner has to wait until the end of the term in order to receive the full sum insured.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
20. What is a juvenile endowment plan?  
  
A juvenile endowment plan is specially designed to mature at specified ages for educational purposes. It is written to mature at the age at which the insured (a juvenile when the policy was first written) is embarking on his/her tertiary education.
 
 	Back to Top
 

21. What are the advantages and disadvantages of endowment life insurance? 
  
The advantages of endowment life insurance are:
It provides life insurance protection together with a large savings and investment element 
It has surrender values, loan values and paid-up values 
Non-forfeiture privileges are included 
It is flexible in that the term of the policy can be chosen to meet the financial need (when it arises) of the policyholder, whatever the reason for the need may be 
The disadvantages include: 
It only provides protection for a specified period 
The premium payable is usually much higher than that of whole life insurance or term insurance 
It does not have the renewability (a few companies do provide renewable endowment policies subject to a maximum issue age) or convertibility option available in term insurance.  
 	Back to Top
 
 
22. What needs does endowment life insurance satisfy? 
  
Endowment life insurance satisfies the following needs:
It provides a systematic way of saving for people who are extravagant 
Furthermore, if death should occur at any time during the term, the insurance proceeds revert to the beneficiaries 
It is guaranteed to satisfy a certain purpose or goal because the sum of money will be available irrespective of whether the insured lives or dies 
It can serve specific purposes, for example, creating a retirement fund or an educational fund. 
 	Back to Top
 
 
23. What is Family Takaful? 
  
This is a form of life insurance that is prescribed in the Takaful Act of 1984. However, the Act itself has very few provisions on how the scheme should be implemented, except that it must be in accordance with the Syariah or principles of Islamic law.
  
The aims of the Family Takaful are threefold:
To encourage participants to save regularly 
To invest the participants' money in ways which are not objectionable to Islam  
To provide protection in the form of Takaful benefits to the heirs of participants who die before the maturity of their plans  
All Family Takaful plans must be for a fixed period but they do not carry a fixed sum insured. The amount of benefits that a participant receives depends on the maturity period, the amount of contributions that he has agreed to make and profits, if any, earned from the investment of his contributions.
 
Family Takaful is a defined contribution plan. A participant decides on the size of his annual contribution provided that it exceeds or equals the minimum premium. The money paid goes into two different accounts, the Participants' Account (PA) and the
Participants' Special Account (PSA). The PA, into which the larger proportion of the money is paid, is a form of savings and investment account. Money paid into the PSA is paid with the intention of helping fellow participants in times of hardship. The actual proportion of each participant's contributions to this account is determined by the company based on the amount of payments it makes from that fund to the families of participants who die before the maturity of their plans.
 
Money from both the accounts are invested by the company on a profit and loss sharing basis in enterprises which are not contrary to Islam either in their operations or in the nature of their business. Profits generated by the investment of the PA funds are shared between the company and the participants in a pre-agreed ratio. Profits generated by the investment of PSA funds are used to beef up the fund.
 
Although the Islamic principle of Mudharabah requires the participants to share in both the profits and losses of the company, the committee on the Takaful Scheme recommended that any loss should be borne by the company alone.
Takaful benefits are paid to the participant if he survives until his plan matures in the following manner:
 
From his PA  
The total amount of takaful installments paid by the participant during the tenure of his participation and his share of profits from the investment of takaful installments credited into his PA. 
 
From his PSA  
The net surplus allocated to the participant as shown from the last valuation of the PSA.  
   
If he dies before his plan matures, the Takaful benefit is to be paid to a proper claimant, without any probate or letters of administration. A proper claimant is one who claims to be entitled to the benefits as executor of the deceased or one who claims to be entitled to such sum under the relevant law. The latter was provided for as participation is not restricted to Muslims.
 
If a participant dies before the maturity of his plan, the amount of benefits paid to the claimant are as follows:
From his PA  
Total amount of installments paid by the deceased from inception date to the due date of installment payment prior to his death and his share of profits from the investment of installments which have been credited into his PA.
From his PSA  
The outstanding takaful installments which would have been paid by the deceased should he survive the period of the plan, calculated from the date of death to the date of maturity of his plan.  
If a participant decides to withdraw from the scheme before the maturity of his plan, then he is returned all the money in his PA and the profits which that money has earned so far. His contributions to the PSA, being a form of donation which he has agreed to make, is not returned. There is also a facility to part withdraw his PA but only after the plan has been inforce for two years.
 
The Takaful Act provides that a person under 18 years shall not have the capacity to enter into a Takaful contract. This differs from the Insurance Act, 1963, which provides that a person between 10 and 16 years of age can still enter into a contract with the written consent of his parents or guardian.
 
In the Takaful scheme, a participant is both the insured and the policyholder. Furthermore the scheme can benefit only the participant and his family and not a third party.
 
The Takaful companies are governed by the Director-General of Takaful who is also the Director General of Insurance.  
  
	Back to Top
 
 
24. What are the different types of children's policies? 
  
There are basically 2 main types of children's policies, namely protected educational policies and children's deferred insurance. These policies are discussed in the following questions.
 
 	Back to Top
 

25. What are protected educational policies? 
  
Protected educational policies are issued on the life of the parent or guardian. The child is named as the beneficiary and he/she will only receive the sum insured on reaching a specified age. 
 
The purpose of this type of policy is to provide for the costs of higher education of a child. At maturity, the policy money may be paid in one lump sum or installments. It is also payable upon the death of the insured (the parent) during the term of the policy.
 
Such payment can be arranged so that the child can receive a portion of the summ insured at the time of his/her parent's or guardian's death and the balance upon his/her reaching the required age at the end of the policy term.
 
 	Back to Top
 

26. What is children's deferred insurance? 
  
Children's deferred insurance is issued on the life of the child. The parent or guardian is the policyowner. When the child reaches the vesting age (either 18 or 21), the policy will be vested in the child (thereby making him/her the policyowner as well as the insured) and future premiums will be continued by him/her. Sometimes, the parent may want to continue paying the premiums, which is allowed by the insurance company. 
The purpose of this type of policy is to provide the child with future life insurance cover. However, if the child dies before attaining the vesting age, the sum insured of the policy is not payable. Only the premiums paid (with or without interest, depending on the company's policy) are refunded. Should the child die after the vesting age, the full sum assured will be paid.
 
From the above, the implication is that the policy does not provide the normal protection until the child attains the vesting age. The insurance protection begins at the vesting age irrespective of whether the child is in good health or not. The policy then becomes a normal permanent insurance policy such as whole life insurance or endowment insurance.
 
The premiums are payable throughout the term of the policy. Sometimes, there will be a waiver of premium should the parent die before the child reaches the vesting age. In this case, an additional premium is required for the waiver of premium benefit. This additional premium is dependent on the age of the parent. After the vesting age, the child will have to continue paying the premiums.
 
1. What is term life insurance?
  
Term life insurance provides for the payment of the sum assured only if the life assured dies within a specified period. If the life assured does not die, the policy ceases and the premiums paid are retained by the insurance company. Thus, the premiums paid contain no savings element. As such, term life insurance provides the maximum protection on the life assured for a specified number of years. 
 
Term insurance is regarded as temporary insurance (as opposed to permanent insurance like whole life), and as such, it does not provide any surrender values, paid-up values, loan values or any of the non-forfeiture privileges.
  
This relatively inexpensive form of insurance cover is useful for the following purposes: 
To provide life insurance cover for a short period  
To cover a loan  
To cover the needs of a family in the event of the premature death of the life assured, before a house mortgage is repaid, or while the children are young 
 	Back to Top
 
 
2. What is renewable term insurance? 
  
Renewable term insurance is one in which the policyowner is allowed to renew his/her term policy, when it expires, for another term policy, irrespective of the insured's state of health at the time of renewal. 
 
The premium payable is level during the term of each renewal and it will increase at the next renewal based on the attained age of the insured at the time of renewal.
 
Like all term policies, there are neither surrender values, paid-up values, loan values nor non-forfeiture privileges.
This relatively inexpensive form of insurance cover is useful for the following purposes: 
To provide life insurance cover for a short period  
To cover a loan  
To cover the needs of a family in the event of the premature death of the life assured, before a house mortgage is repaid, or while the children are young 
 	Back to Top
 
 
3. What is level term insurance? 
  
Level term insurance is one in which the sum insured of the policy remains the same throughout the term of the policy. Should the life assured die at any time during the term of the policy, the fixed sum assured will be payable. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
4. What is convertible term insurance? 
  
Convertible term insurance is one in which the life insured has the option of converting his/her term policy, at any time during the term of the policy, to a permanent insurance policy such as whole life or endowment without evidence of insurability. 
 
At the time of conversion, the new premium rate will be based on the life assured's then attained age.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
5. What is decreasing or reducing term insurance? 
  
Decreasing or reducing term insurance is one where the sum assured of the policy decreases each year to a zero balance at the end of the term. Sometimes it is a rider which is attached to a permanent insurance policy. 
This type of term insurance is useful when the life assured needs the protection most at the earlier years of the policy. It can also be used as a means of protecting a mortgage.
  
	Back to Top
 

6. What are the types of decreasing term insurance available? 
  
There are generally 2 types of decreasing term insurance available. The first type is concerned with protecting a mortgage or loan. This type of insurance is usually issued as a basic plan and the premium is paid in one lump sum at the onset of the policy.
 
The other type is concerned with providing greater protection in the earlier years of the policy. It is usually issued as a rider on a basic plan and the premium is payable every year, together with the premium of the basic plan of insurance.
  
	Back to Top
 

7. What is mortgage reducing term assurance or insurance? 
  
Mortgage reducing term assurance or insurance is a form of decreasing term insurance whereby the sum assured of the policy decreases in accordance with the loan outstanding. House purchasers usually assign this type of policy to the banks as collateral securities for their housing loans. The policyowner usually pay a single premium for such a policy and the amount is dependent on the principal loan amount, the term of repayment, and the mortgage loan interest rate. At the end of the repayment term, the amount of cover decreases to nil, just as the loan outstanding does the same. Like all term policies, there are no benefits payable at the end of the policy term. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
8. What is group term insurance? 
  
Group term insurance is one that covers several persons under one policy, called a master policy. The individuals insured under this policy are not parties to the contract, although they do have certain rights under the policy. Usually, groups insured under group insurance policies are employer-employee groups. In this type of insured group, the employer is the policyowner and the employees are the insureds. 
 
This type of insurance is usually a yearly renewable term insurance, and the premiums are intended to cover expected benefits and expenses for only the current policy year.
  
	Back to Top
 

9. What are the pros and cons of term insurance?  
  
The pros of term insurance are: 
It provides the most cover for the least premium, compared to whole life and endowment insurances. 
Renewable and convertible term insurances are flexible, and they safeguard the life insured against a sudden loss of insurability.
The cons of term insurance would include: 
It does not offer any surrender, loan, paid-up values and non-forfeiture privileges.  
Underwriters tend to underwrite such applications much more stringently and the non-medical limits are usually lower than that of permanent insurances. 
As it has no savings element, the policyowner receives nothing at the end of the term of the policy.  
	Back to Top
 
 
10. Why buy term life insurance?  
  
The reasons for buying term life insurance are: 
To provide maximum amount of insurance protection for limted period at the lowest cost. 
To protect the family from loss of earnings and to raise the children until they are independent.
To protect the family from debts due to the creditors if the breadwinner dies.
To provide additional death coverage in a pension plan or other forms of superannuation scheme.
 	Back to Top
 
 
11. What is whole life insurance? 
  
Whole life insurance is a contract that theoretically covers the insured and a level premium is payable for life. If the insured dies, the sum assured less any outstanding policy loans are payable to beneficiary. Sometimes the sum assured will be payable when the insured reaches a certain age such as 85, 90 or 100 years. 
 
This is a permanent insurance policy and hence, there are surrender values available. Depending on length of premium payment there are two types of whole life insurance i.e. ordinary whole life and limited payment whole life.
 
 	Back to Top
 

12. What is ordinary whole life insurance? 
  
Ordinary whole life insurance is one where the premiums are payable throughout the lifetime of the life assured. If the life assured dies, the contract provides various settlement options to be payable to the beneficiaries. 
 
After the first few policy years (normally the third), the policy will have accumulated surrender value. The policyowner may then apply for a policy loan (against the surrender value) to meet his/her financial needs. Furthermore, the policy can be converted to a reduced paid-up policy.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
13. What is limited payment whole life insurance? 
  
Limited payment whole life insurance is one in which the premiums are payable for a limited number of years (usually 10, 15, 20, 25 or 30 years). Sometimes, the policy is designed in such a way that premiums payment is not required from his/her retirement date (no matter whether he did retire) onward. After the premium paying period, the policy becomes paid-up for its full amount and no further premiums are required.
 
The purpose of this limited payment is to enable the policyowner to pay up the policy during his/her working lifetime so that after the completion of the specified period, the policy may remain in force without imposing further financial obligations on the policyowner. The premium payable is greater than that of an ordinary whole life insurance policy.
  
	Back to Top
 

14. What is whole life endowment insurance? 
  
Whole life endowment insurance is one where the premiums are payable throughout the lifetime of the insured and guaranteed cash bonuses will be paid at specified intervals while the policy is in force. The cash bonus is usually expressed as a fixed percentage (usually 10% or 15%) of the sum assured of the policy, and is usually payable at the end of each 5th policy year.  
Some companies allow the cash bonus to be paid every 3 years. 
The policyowner may withdraw the bonuses or keep them with the company. The company will pay interest (at a rate to be determined by the company) on the accumulated sum kept with it.
 
The premium payable is higher when compared to the ordinary whole life or limited payment whole life policy. Accordingly, the savings element is also larger, but immediately after the cash bonus is available, the reserve held back decreases substantially and accumulates again until the next cash bonus payment.
  
	Back to Top
 

15. What kind of needs does whole life insurance cover? 
  
The needs that whole life insurance covers include: 
To protect the family in case of the breadwinner's premature death 
To provide a savings fund (for example, the cash value can be used for retirement) 
To provide protection for the lifetime of the policyholder 
To protect the family from debts due to business, mortgage and other creditors if the breadwinner dies 
To provide additional death coverage in a pension plan or other forms of superannuation scheme     
 	Back to Top
 
 
16. What are the advantages and disadvantages of whole life insurance? 
  
The advantages of whole life insurance are: 
It gives the insured maximum permanent protection at moderate cost each year
It is most suitable to the average man/woman of moderate income and who requires considerable family protection with a savings element
It need not be renewed or converted as with some term policies 
It has surrender values, loan values, and paid-up values; in addition, it contains non-forfeiture privileges 
The disadvantages are:
It has a higher premium than that of term insurance
It requires premiums to be paid for the lifetime of the policyholder. This problem can be overcome by purchasing a limited payment whole life policy. However, the premium paying term is still relatively long
If the cash value has been exhausted, the policy will lapse and no more protection will be provided 
 	Back to Top
 
 
17. What is endowment insurance? 
  
Endowment insurance provides for the payment of the sum insured and any accrued bonuses at the maturity of the policy, or on earlier death of the life assured, whichever comes first. Premiums are payable throughout the term of the policy.
 
Theoretically, endowment insurance is made up of a pure endowment insurance (a pure endowment policy is one which pays the face amount of the policy only if the insured survives to the end of the term of the policy) and a term insurance. The pure endowment insurance will pay the sum assured if the insured survives to the end of the endowment period. The term insurance will pay the sum assured if the insured dies during the endowment period. Therefore, it can be said that the endowment insurance is a combination of pure endowment insurance and term insurance.
 
Like whole life policies, endowment policies steadily build up cash values. However, since an endowment policy matures much earlier than a whole life policy, the cash values build up more rapidly. And because of this, the premium payable is higher than that of a whole life policy.
 
This type of policy is a means of systematic saving with life insurance protection during the chosen period. It can be used for many purposes including:
Saving for retirement 
Repayment of a loan 
Repayment of a debt if death occurs before the loan is repaid 
Providing funds for travel or for any future purpose, such as children's education
 	Back to Top
 

18. What are the common endowment life policies? 
  
The common endowment life policies include: 
Those payable in 10, 15, 25, 30 or more years 
Those that cause the policy to mature at certain ages such as 55, 60 or 65 
Those that cater for juveniles, especially for educational purposes 
Those that are written for a short term, especially for savings purposes 
Those that are written for a long term, especially for protection purposes and to provide for old age.  
 	Back to Top
 
 
19. What is anticipated endowment?  
  
An anticipated endowment is an endowment policy with guaranteed cash payments payable to the policyowner at regular intervals during the term of the policy. The full sum assured will still be payable should the insured die during the term of the policy. However, if the insured survives till the end of the term, then he/she will receive only the balance of the sum assured (usually 50% of the original sum assured).
 
This type of endowment allows the policyowner to receive payments earlier. This is in contrast to the normal endowment policy in which the policyowner has to wait until the end of the term in order to receive the full sum insured.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
20. What is a juvenile endowment plan?  
  
A juvenile endowment plan is specially designed to mature at specified ages for educational purposes. It is written to mature at the age at which the insured (a juvenile when the policy was first written) is embarking on his/her tertiary education.
 
 	Back to Top
 

21. What are the advantages and disadvantages of endowment life insurance? 
  
The advantages of endowment life insurance are:
It provides life insurance protection together with a large savings and investment element 
It has surrender values, loan values and paid-up values 
Non-forfeiture privileges are included 
It is flexible in that the term of the policy can be chosen to meet the financial need (when it arises) of the policyholder, whatever the reason for the need may be 
The disadvantages include: 
It only provides protection for a specified period 
The premium payable is usually much higher than that of whole life insurance or term insurance 
It does not have the renewability (a few companies do provide renewable endowment policies subject to a maximum issue age) or convertibility option available in term insurance.  
 	Back to Top
 
 
22. What needs does endowment life insurance satisfy? 
  
Endowment life insurance satisfies the following needs:
It provides a systematic way of saving for people who are extravagant 
Furthermore, if death should occur at any time during the term, the insurance proceeds revert to the beneficiaries 
It is guaranteed to satisfy a certain purpose or goal because the sum of money will be available irrespective of whether the insured lives or dies 
It can serve specific purposes, for example, creating a retirement fund or an educational fund. 
 	Back to Top
 
 
23. What is Family Takaful? 
  
This is a form of life insurance that is prescribed in the Takaful Act of 1984. However, the Act itself has very few provisions on how the scheme should be implemented, except that it must be in accordance with the Syariah or principles of Islamic law.
  
The aims of the Family Takaful are threefold:
To encourage participants to save regularly 
To invest the participants' money in ways which are not objectionable to Islam  
To provide protection in the form of Takaful benefits to the heirs of participants who die before the maturity of their plans  
All Family Takaful plans must be for a fixed period but they do not carry a fixed sum insured. The amount of benefits that a participant receives depends on the maturity period, the amount of contributions that he has agreed to make and profits, if any, earned from the investment of his contributions.
 
Family Takaful is a defined contribution plan. A participant decides on the size of his annual contribution provided that it exceeds or equals the minimum premium. The money paid goes into two different accounts, the Participants' Account (PA) and the
Participants' Special Account (PSA). The PA, into which the larger proportion of the money is paid, is a form of savings and investment account. Money paid into the PSA is paid with the intention of helping fellow participants in times of hardship. The actual proportion of each participant's contributions to this account is determined by the company based on the amount of payments it makes from that fund to the families of participants who die before the maturity of their plans.
 
Money from both the accounts are invested by the company on a profit and loss sharing basis in enterprises which are not contrary to Islam either in their operations or in the nature of their business. Profits generated by the investment of the PA funds are shared between the company and the participants in a pre-agreed ratio. Profits generated by the investment of PSA funds are used to beef up the fund.
 
Although the Islamic principle of Mudharabah requires the participants to share in both the profits and losses of the company, the committee on the Takaful Scheme recommended that any loss should be borne by the company alone.
Takaful benefits are paid to the participant if he survives until his plan matures in the following manner:
 
From his PA  
The total amount of takaful installments paid by the participant during the tenure of his participation and his share of profits from the investment of takaful installments credited into his PA. 
 
From his PSA  
The net surplus allocated to the participant as shown from the last valuation of the PSA.  
   
If he dies before his plan matures, the Takaful benefit is to be paid to a proper claimant, without any probate or letters of administration. A proper claimant is one who claims to be entitled to the benefits as executor of the deceased or one who claims to be entitled to such sum under the relevant law. The latter was provided for as participation is not restricted to Muslims.
 
If a participant dies before the maturity of his plan, the amount of benefits paid to the claimant are as follows:
From his PA  
Total amount of installments paid by the deceased from inception date to the due date of installment payment prior to his death and his share of profits from the investment of installments which have been credited into his PA.
From his PSA  
The outstanding takaful installments which would have been paid by the deceased should he survive the period of the plan, calculated from the date of death to the date of maturity of his plan.  
If a participant decides to withdraw from the scheme before the maturity of his plan, then he is returned all the money in his PA and the profits which that money has earned so far. His contributions to the PSA, being a form of donation which he has agreed to make, is not returned. There is also a facility to part withdraw his PA but only after the plan has been inforce for two years.
 
The Takaful Act provides that a person under 18 years shall not have the capacity to enter into a Takaful contract. This differs from the Insurance Act, 1963, which provides that a person between 10 and 16 years of age can still enter into a contract with the written consent of his parents or guardian.
 
In the Takaful scheme, a participant is both the insured and the policyholder. Furthermore the scheme can benefit only the participant and his family and not a third party.
 
The Takaful companies are governed by the Director-General of Takaful who is also the Director General of Insurance.  
  
	Back to Top
 
 
24. What are the different types of children's policies? 
  
There are basically 2 main types of children's policies, namely protected educational policies and children's deferred insurance. These policies are discussed in the following questions.
 
 	Back to Top
 

25. What are protected educational policies? 
  
Protected educational policies are issued on the life of the parent or guardian. The child is named as the beneficiary and he/she will only receive the sum insured on reaching a specified age. 
 
The purpose of this type of policy is to provide for the costs of higher education of a child. At maturity, the policy money may be paid in one lump sum or installments. It is also payable upon the death of the insured (the parent) during the term of the policy.
 
Such payment can be arranged so that the child can receive a portion of the summ insured at the time of his/her parent's or guardian's death and the balance upon his/her reaching the required age at the end of the policy term.
 
 	Back to Top
 

26. What is children's deferred insurance? 
  
Children's deferred insurance is issued on the life of the child. The parent or guardian is the policyowner. When the child reaches the vesting age (either 18 or 21), the policy will be vested in the child (thereby making him/her the policyowner as well as the insured) and future premiums will be continued by him/her. Sometimes, the parent may want to continue paying the premiums, which is allowed by the insurance company. 
The purpose of this type of policy is to provide the child with future life insurance cover. However, if the child dies before attaining the vesting age, the sum insured of the policy is not payable. Only the premiums paid (with or without interest, depending on the company's policy) are refunded. Should the child die after the vesting age, the full sum assured will be paid.
 
From the above, the implication is that the policy does not provide the normal protection until the child attains the vesting age. The insurance protection begins at the vesting age irrespective of whether the child is in good health or not. The policy then becomes a normal permanent insurance policy such as whole life insurance or endowment insurance.
 
The premiums are payable throughout the term of the policy. Sometimes, there will be a waiver of premium should the parent die before the child reaches the vesting age. In this case, an additional premium is required for the waiver of premium benefit. This additional premium is dependent on the age of the parent. After the vesting age, the child will have to continue paying the premiums.
What does life insurance with or without profits mean? 
  
Many life insurance companies offer whole life policy or an endowment policy "with profits". Sometimes, the with profits policy is a rider that is attached to the whole life or endowment policy. 
 
A "with profits" policy is one where the policyowner shares in the profits that the company makes, and these are added to the benefit which is finally paid out. All else being equal, the premium payable will be more than that of a without profits policy. As you would have gathered by now, a without profits policy is one which does not share in the profits that the company makes.
 
 	Back to Top

 
2. What does participating or non-participating life insurance mean? 
  
A participating life insurance policy (also called a with profits policy) is one which will participate in the distribution of surplus if the life insurance company's experience is favourable. Conversely, a non-participating policy cannot do so. Policyowner of a participating policy will pay a higher premium for a given sum insured than a non-participating policy because he/she will usually receive greater benefits.
 
Usually, the policyowner can elect to convert a non-participating policy into a participating one by payment of additional premium. The additional premium will commence from the anniversary date immediately following the date of conversion. The bonuses are granted only for the future period commencing from the date of such conversion.
 
However, policyowners are usually not allowed to convert a participating policy into a non-participating one. The rationale behind this is that all policyowners may want to convert their participating policies into non-participating ones when the company is undergoing a bad experience.
 
Sometimes, the participating policy is the rider attached to the basic policy plan (which is non-participating by itself). In this case, the rider can be attached at any time during the term of the basic policy plan subject to insurability.
  
	Back to Top

 
3. With respect to life insurance, what is a bonus?
  
A bonus is a refund of excess premium paid to the policyholder of a participating policy. Such bonuses are paid out of the insurer's divisible surplus if the insurer's actual experience is favourable. These bonuses are usually deferred in that they are only payable at the end of the term of the policy, or when a claim arises. They cannot be withdrawn during the term of the policy; however, they do have a cash value (after a period of 3 full years, usually) and should the policy be surrendered, the cash value can be obtained. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
4. What is a simple reversionary bonus?
 
A simple reversionary bonus is one that is calculated on a simple interest basis. At the end of each policy year, an annual bonus will be declared and this amount will earn interest for the remainder of the term of the policy. In this case, the interest on the bonuses that have been accumulated does not earn interest; only the principal amount earns interest. 
  
	Back to Top
 
  
5. What is a compound reversionary bonus?
 
A compound reversionary bonus is one that is determined on a compound interest basis. In this case, interest will be earned on the total of bonuses declared and accrued interest, i.e. both the bonuses declared and accrued interest will earn interest. 
 
Bonuses on a compound interest basis accumulate at a faster rate than those on a simple interest basis.
 
	Back to Top

 
6. What is a death or claims bonus?
  
A death bonus is one which is only payable on death. It is usually incorporated into a reversionary bonus rider to enhance the benefit payable on death. It is payable in addition to the sum of the annual bonuses which have been declared and vested at the time of death. However, if the insured survives until the maturity of the rider, the death bonus will not be payable. Some insurers will include the death bonus in the benefit payable for total and permanent disability claims.
 
The death bonus is usually only payable after the policy has been in force for a certain number of years. This is to allow the death bonus to accumulate to a significant amount. The rate is also dependent upon the company's financial condition at the time of claim. 
  
	Back to Top
  
 
7. What is a final, terminal or maturity bonus? 
  
A final, terminal or maturity bonus is one which is payable at policy maturity. This bonus is payable in addition to the sum of the annual bonuses which are declared at the end of every year during the term of the policy. However, the final bonus is not payable on death or total and permanent disability. 
 
The rate of final bonus will depend on the company's actual experience at the time of policy maturity.
   
	Back to Top
 
 
8. What are guaranteed cash payments? 
  
Guaranteed cash payments are cash payments which are paid at regular intervals during the term of the policy. This feature is usually found in permanent insurance plans such as whole life and endowment. The payments are guaranteed and are made as long as the insured is still alive.
 
As our country's health care system improves, the average person will live longer. Thus, such policies will become more expensive as the insureds live longer and thus collect more payments.
 
A good example of a policy with guaranteed cash payments is our Whole Life Special.
   
	Back to Top
 
  
9. What are policy dividends?  
 
Policy dividends are a refund of excess premium paid to the policyholder of a participating policy. Such dividends are paid out of the insurer's divisible surplus. In this case, the policyholder is given the right to participate in the distribution of surplus if the company's actual experience is sufficiently favorable. This distribution of surplus comes in the form of a policy dividend. The policy dividends can be kept with the insurer or withdrawn. If they are kept with the insurer, interest will be earned on the accumulated sum. The rate of interest is determined by the insurer.  
  
	Back to Top
 
 
10. What is policy cash value or surrender value?  

Policy cash value or surrender value is the amount of money the policyholder will receive as a refund if the policyholder cancels the coverage and returns the policy to the company.
 
The cash value is only available for permanent insurances such as whole life and endowment. In these cases, the cash value is only available after the policy has been in force for three full years. This payment of cash value after a minimum period of three full years is guaranteed by law.
   
	Back to Top
 
 
11. What is a policy loan?  
 
A policy loan is one which is taken out on the security of the policy. It can only be taken out if the policy has a cash value. There is usually a cash value after the policy has been in force for three full years. Theoretically, the maximum loan value of a policy is 100% of the cash value. However, in practice, in order to prevent the sum of the loan value plus accrued interest from exceeding the cash value (causing the policy to lapse), the maximum loan value that will be taken out is 90% of the cash value.
 
The rate of interest charged on the loan will be determined by the company. An notice showing the outstanding balance and interest due will be issued to the policyowner at least twice a year until the loan is fully settled. The interest which is not paid within one month after it has become due or by end of the company's financial year will be accumulated at compound interest. There will be a minimum period for which the loan must run. This minimum period varies between companies, but in general, it is six months. If repayment of the loan is made before the minimum period is over, interest for at least the minimum period may be charged.
 
The life insurer does not insist on repayment of the loan as long as the policy is in force. At any time while the policy is in force, the whole or any part of the loan (together with accrued interest) may be repaid.
 
At the time of a claim, ie. settlement in the event of death or maturity of the policy, any loan together with the accrued interest shall be deducted from the amount otherwise payable under the policy.
 
If the policy is converted into paid-up or extended term insurance, the outstanding loan amount is deducted from the available cash value before it is used to purchase the paid-up or extended term insurance.
 
Policy loans should not be confused with study loans that some insurers offer as an additional benefit to their juvenile or children's policies. Such study loans are real loans similar to what you can get from the banks or finance companies. It is given only when there are suitable loan guarantors and the insured can show evidence of acceptance by the university. Like bank loans, such study loans must be repaid.
 
If there is sufficient cash value, a policyowner can always apply for a policy loan to finance the insured's (or anybody's) university education without resorting to a study loan.
 
The current interest rate charged by Manulife Insurance Berhad on policy loan is at 8% per annum. A RM5.00 stamp duty is imposed per RM1,000 of the loan amount.
  
	Back to Top
   
 
12. What is a policy date? 
  
Providing that there was no backdating, the policy date is the date of inception of the policy. This means that the coverage provided under the policy will commence at the policy date stated in the policy. The premium rate is calculated based on the age of insured nearest to this policy date or next birthday after this policy date, depending on individual insurer's practice.
 
Backdating refers to the practice in which the policyowner selects his last birthdate as the policy date so that the lower premium rate applies. However, in such a case, the insured is not covered during the backdated period. Usually, the applicant is allowed to backdate his policy up to a maximum of six months.
 
	Back to Top
    
 
13. What is a policy anniversary date? 
  
A policy anniversary date is the date this year when your policy will be an exact number of years from the policy date. 
This date is important as your premium payment will be due on this date and some of your benefits may also be payable on this date.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
14. What is a policy due date? 

The policy due date (also known as premium due date) is the date at which a premium payment becomes due. Most insurance companies will allow a grace period of 30 or 31 days after a policy due date, within which the premium may be paid without penalty.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
15. What is modal premium? 
  
Modal premium is the premium that is payable on a premium due date. The frequency or mode of payment can be annual, half-yearly, quarterly, or monthly. 
 
To determine the modal premium, an adjustment will be made to the annual premium by multiplying it by a factor taking into account that the entire year's premium is no longer received at the beginning of the policy year. Of course, if the frequency of payment is annual, modal premium will be equal to annual premium.
  
	Back to Top
 

16. What is an annual premium?  
  
An annual premium is the premium payable if the frequency of premium payment is annual. It is the practice of life insurers to quote premiums payable yearly in advance. 
 
	Back to Top
 
 
17. What is annualised premium?  
  
Annualised premium is the total premiums (you can think of this as the sum of the modal premiums in a year) which are payable in a year if the mode of payment is not on an annual basis. For example, premiums could be paid half-yearly, quarterly, or monthly.
 
Except for annual mode policies, the annualised premium is always greater than the annual premium because of increased administrative cost. For annual mode policies, the annualised premium is always equal to the annual premium. Furthermore, the fact that the full (annual) premium is not held by the insurance company from the beginning of the year necessitates an additional charge.
 
Most life insurers state their annual new sales in terms of annualised premium. 
 
	Back to Top
 
 
18. Who is an insured? 
  
An insured (or assured) is the person whose life is insured under the policy. The policy proceeds will be paid when the stated contingency affects the insured. 
 
Normally, the insured is a single person. However, in joint life policies, there are two insureds, usually a husband and his wife. In family policies, the insureds are the entire family. In group policies, there are many insureds.

	Back to Top

 
19. Who is a policyowner or policyholder?  
  
A policyowner or policyholder is the person who has all the ownership rights of the policy. He or she is then allowed to 
Name and change the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) provided no trusts are involved 
Receive a policy loan  
Receive guaranteed cash payments or dividends  
Transfer the ownership rights to another person by assignment or endorsement  
Surrender the policy 
Convert the policy  
Change premium mode  
Change the correspondence address  
Add or drop riders  
Change the sum insured  
Reinstate the policy after it has lapsed  
In contrast, the insured and the beneficiary, unless he is also the policyowner, possess no such rights.
 
	Back to Top
 

20. Who is a policy payor?  
  
A policy payor is the person who makes the premium payments. This term is usually used when the person making the premium payments is different from the insured. In most cases, this involves a juvenile policy in which the policy payor is the parent and the insured is the child.
 
In rare instances, the policy payor is neither the policyowner nor the insured. For instance, the father can be paying for a juvenile policy that his wife bought on their child's life.
 
Many life insurers sell a payor rider that waives all premiums if the payor dies or becomes permanently disabled.
 
	Back to Top
 

21. Who is a beneficiary?  
  
A beneficiary is the person (or a legal entity) who is entitled to receive the policy proceeds. Sometimes there is more than one beneficiary. In this case, the policy proceeds will be divided, in the amounts determined by the policyholder as specified in the policy contract, between the beneficiaries.

	Back to Top

 
22. Who is a contingent beneficiary? 
  
A contingent beneficiary is the person (or party) designated to receive the policy proceeds if the insured person outlives the primary beneficiary (or one of the primary beneficiaries).
 
	Back to Top
 
 
23. Who is an assignee?  
  
An assignee is the party to whom all or certain rights are transferred under an absolute or conditional (sometimes called a collateral) assignment. This assignment is essentially a transfer of legal rights under a life insurance policy. If it is absolute, all the rights are passed to the assignee. If it is conditional, only some of the ownership rights are passed to the assignee (usually for a temporary period).
 
The person who transfers the rights under the policy is called the assignor.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
24. Who is a mortgagor? 
  
A mortgagor is the party who takes up a loan and pledge his/her property as security. A mortgage is a legal instrument under which a lender can claim the property pledged for a loan if the borrower does not make the loan payments when due. The purpose for taking up the loan is usually to purchase the property itself. Should the mortgagor default on the payments, the mortgagee has the right to repossess the mortgagor's property and put it up for sale in order to recover the outstanding amount owed. Usually, this measure can only be taken after a certain period has elapsed (for example, if the mortgagor has defaulted on 3 successive payments)
  
	Back to Top
  
 
25. Who is a mortgagee? 
  
A mortgagee is the party to which the property is pledged, and who makes the loan to the mortgagor. The mortgagee has the right to repossess the property pledged for the loan if the mortgagor does not make the loan payments when due. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
26. Who is a life insurance agent? 
  
A life insurance agent is a sales person who is appointed by the life insurer to canvass for new business on individual lives and group insurance business and providing after-sales service throughout the life of the policy. He/she also carries out other tasks or duties as may be required by the insurer from time to time. In Malaysia, he/she is not allowed to represent more than one life insurance company, other than the company which appointed him/her. Furthermore, under the Insurance Act, an insurance agent may only represent a registered insurer.

	Back to Top


27. Who is an insurance broker?  
  
An insurance broker is an insurance salesperson or corporate entity who operates independently of any life insurance company. He/she is usually highly qualified and/or experienced in insurance. He/she/it is usually considered to be the agent of his/her/its clients, rather than the agent of any insurance company.

	Back to Top
 

28. What is surplus, and what is the difference between profit and surplus?  
  
Surplus is the term used to describe the amount by which a life insurance company's assets exceed its liabilities and capital.
 
On the other hand, profit refers to the extra income that is not needed to pay for the cost of providing insurance. Profit can be thought of as an addition to surplus.
 
	Back to Top


29. What is an advance deposit?  
  
An advance deposit is the minimum amount that is required to be submitted when an application for insurance is made. If premium mode is quarterly or less frequent, the advance deposit amount is often the first modal premium and the stamp duty. If premium mode is monthly, the required amount is often the sum of the stamp duty plus more than one modal premium.
 
If the proposal is accepted, a letter of acceptance will be issued to the proposer requesting him/her to make the necessary payment of premium within a certain number of days. 

	Back to Top
 
 
30. What is a future premium? 
  
A future premium is one that is paid before it is due. These premiums earn interest at a specified rate determined by the insurer. They can be used to pay for the subsequent premiums, as and when they fall due. More importantly, it saves you the hassle. 
 
An insurer may not pay interest on future premium on all of their policies as interest on future premium may be a feature available only for certain plans. Furthermore, a premium, paid before it is due, will not necessarily earn interest. You have to ask for it to be treated as a future premium. Your insurance agent should be able to advise you on your insurer's exact practice.
 
The name advance premium sounds similar to future premium. However, life insurers will usually pay no interest on advance premium.
 
Hint. Check with your insurer on the interest rate that they are using to accumulate your future premium. You may be pleasantly surprised! 
   
	Back to Top
 
 
31.What is a suspense premium? 
 
A suspense premium is one which is suspended because the insurer is unable to process and recognise it as premium, probably due to inadequate information. 
 
For instance, a premium payment received may not be equal to an exact multiple of the modal premium of the policy, or the policy may have lapsed. In such an event, the correct procedure is to place the premium in the suspense account while a customer service representative contacts the policyowner to clarify matters. Life insurers cannot assume that the policyowner has paid the wrong amount because he may actually be making payment taking into account pending endorsements. However if the grace period for the premium due has expired, the life insurer will use any money in the suspense account to pay premium before resorting to an automatic premium loan.
 
Many companies treat advance deposits from new applications in the same manner until the policy is issued, after which, the relevant amount is extracted from the suspense account and credited to the premium account. Other companies place advance deposits in a separate liability account so that they can estimate new business premium more accurately during new business surges.
 
Usually, money treated as suspense premium does not earn any interest.
 
	Back to Top

 
32. What is the difference between official, conditional deposit and temporary receipts? 
  
An official receipt is given when the payment of premium is made directly to the insurer. This official receipt is often a stamped receipt containing the signature of an authorised person. It indicates that full protection is provided and the insurer's responsibility for all the liabilities is incurred. If the policyholder paid the premium by cheque, the receipt will be deemed invalid if the cheque is dishonoured for any reason. The policyholder will be informed of the cancellation and will be requested to replace the cheque with a new payment.
 
Today, many insurers are issuing computer generated official receipts that are unsigned with the understanding that such receipts are valid, provided that they are printed by the insurer's computer on valid receipt forms.
 
A conditional deposit receipt is issued to the policyholder when the amount of deposit is paid by the policyholder when submitting an application for insurance. Should the application be rejected or a counter proposal made by the insurer, the conditional deposit receipt will be deemed invalid. If the application is accepted and the full first premium is paid, the official receipt will be issued and the conditional deposit receipt cancelled. Some insurers print the offical receipt for the first premium inside the insurance policy without issuing a separate official receipt. Please note that this practice applies only to the first premium.
 
A temporary receipt is one which is issued if the agent is collecting the premium. The insurance company will then issue the official receipt on the basis of this temporary receipt. The date of payment to the agent is deemed to be the date on which the company received the payment.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
33. What are non-forfeiture options or discontinuation benefits? 
  
Non-forfeiture options or discontinuation benefits refer to the various ways in which a policyholder may use the cash value of his/her policy to keep it in force if he/she is unable to make any further premium payments. 

The various non-forfeiture options include: 
 Automatic premium loan 
Extended term insurance
 Reduced or automatic paid-up insurance
Cash surrender   
	Back to Top
 
 
34. What is cash surrender and cash value? 
  
If you surrender a policy after three years, you may be able to get back some money representing the unused portion of the premiums that you have paid. You are said to have cash surrendered the policy and the money that you receive is known as cash value. 
 
Usually term policies have no cash value.
  
	Back to Top
 

35. What is an automatic premium loan? 
  
An automatic premium loan is one of the provision available to keep a policy in force in the event of non-payment of premium if the policy has acquired a cash value. Under this provision, a policy loan equal to the premium will be made to meet the unpaid premium. If subsequent premiums due are also not paid, further policy loans will be taken until the total of unpaid premiums together with the accrued interest (determined by the company) exceed the cash value available. When this stage is reached, the policy will be forfeited.
 
During the period in which the policy is kept in force under this provision, the policyholder may pay the outstanding premiums and interest. By doing this, the policy will be brought back to its original position and no evidence of insurability will be required. 
 
	Back to Top
  
 
36. Should I repay my policy loan or the automatic premium loan? 
  
Technically, the life insurer cannot demand repayment of your policy loan or automatic premium loan as the cash value belongs to the policyowner and not the insurer. 
However, if you are not getting better returns (than the interest rate charged by your life insurer) on your loan, you are advised to repay it so that
If you forget to pay your premium, there is cash value left for another automatic premium loan
Your beneficiaries will enjoy full benefits in the event of a claim
You, the policyowner, will receive the full benefits when your policy matures or you cash it 
If you need to decide which loan to repay first, determine the interest rate charged on these two types of loans and note when your insurer capitalises the interest. An insurer may capitalise the interest at the beginning of its financial year, the calendar year or your policy year. Usually, the interest rate for both type of loans are identical but a few insurers may charge higher interest rates for policy loans to deter policy loans during times of high bank interest rates.
 
	Back to Top
 

37. What is extended term insurance (ETI)?  
  
This is one of the non-forfeiture options. In this option, the policyholder would have originally held a whole life or endowment insurance type of policy. All the available cash value less any indebtedness will be used to purchase a term policy with a sum assured equal to the sum assured of the basic plan less any indebtedness for the maximum period that the available cash value can buy. 
 
If death occurs during this period of extended term insurance, the full sum assured of the basic plan less any indebtedness is payable.
 
If this extended term insurance expires, the policyowner receives nothing.
 
This non-forfeiture option provides maximum protection.

	Back to Top
 
 
38. What is a reduced or automatic paid-up option? 
  
This non-forfeiture option provides for reduced protection for a period equal to the term of the original policy. All the cash value less any indebtedness is used as a single premium to purchase a policy similar to the original basic plan. The new policy covers a period equal to the term of the original basic plan but with a lower sum assured. Usually, all riders will be dropped. 
 
If the insured dies during the term of the reduced paid-up policy, the beneficiary will receive the reduced sum assured. If the policy matures, the policyowner will receive the reduced maturity value. No further premium is required to keep this policy in-force.
 
Should the policyholder wish to revive the original policy, he/she will need to satisfy the insurer as to his/her good health and on top of that, pay the outstanding premiums.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
39. What are riders or supplementary benefits? 
  
Riders or supplementary benefits are additions to an insurance policy which expand or limit the benefits payable and which become a part of the insurance contract. They are usually attached to insurance policies in order to provide additional benefits. 
 
Some life insurers package different type of benefits as separate riders so that they can have the flexibility of combining these riders to form contracts with different set of benefits to suit different customers without having to go through the process of designing a new policy.
  
	Back to Top

 
40. What are the advantages and disadvantages of supplementary benefits or riders? 
  
The advantages of supplementary benefits or riders are: 
The benefits payable can be expanded or limited, depending on how much the policyholder can set aside for premiums; 
The effects of inflation can be countered by purchasing riders which provide an increasing amount of coverage over time; 
The benefits provided by the basic plan of insurance can be complemented; 
Additional benefits can be provided on the occurrence of a dread disease, accidental death, disability or hospitalisation; and 
The added coverage provided is usually cheaper than that provided by the basic plan 
The disadvantages include: 
If the policyholder applies for the rider after the policy has been issued, depending on the type of supplementary benefit rider and amount of coverage requested, he/she may be required to undergo a medical examination in which the cost will be borne by the policyholder;
The approval of certain riders may be delayed pending an investigation. For example, a request for a large accidental death benefit rider might be held until the company verifies the insured's current occupational and medical status; 
The policyholder must have a basic plan of insurance before any rider can be purchased; 
The amount of coverage of the rider is usually limited by the amount of coverage of the basic plan of insurance; and
The riders will be automatically terminated once the basic plan of insurance is terminated. 
 What are the common riders? 
  
The common riders include those covering accidental death, dismemberment, disability, hospitalisation, waiver of premium, term insurance, cash dividend, reversionary bonus and medical living assurance. 
Some life insurers do not sell cash dividend and reversionary bonus riders because they are sold as part of their basic plans.
 
	Back to Top
  
   
2. What are convertible term riders? 
  
Convertible term riders are term riders that give the policyholder the right to convert to a whole life or endowment plan of insurance. 
Please click on term insurance and riders for further information.
   
	Back to Top
   
 
3. What are accidental death riders? 
  
Accidental death riders are riders that provide death benefits if the cause of death is by accident (caused by external, violent, physical, and accidental means) and not by natural means. 
Some of the common exclusions include:
Death as a result of self infliction, committing suicide, poisoning, or inhaling gas, whether sane or insane
Death as a result of childbirth or pregnancy 
	Back to Top
   
 
4. What are disability riders? 
 
Disability riders provide for the payment of a certain sum of money in the event of disability of the life assured. The payments are usually made in installments, and sometimes a lump sum will be made at the end of a certain period if disability persists. In general, the amount of benefits depend on the circumstances which resulted in the disability of the life assured and the degree of disability. There are basically 4 different variations in cover provided by disability riders: 
Temporary total disability  
Temporary partial disability 
Permanent total disability (Total and permanent disability)
Permanent partial disability  
   
	Back to Top
 
   
5. What is temporary disablement? 
  
Temporary disablement is disability which is suffered only temporarily. The benefits for temporary disablements may be classified into temporary total disability or temporary partial disability. It is usual for the benefits to be payable only when the disability is sustained for a minimum period of time. 
  
	Back to Top
   
 
6. What is temporary total disablement? 
  
Temporary total disablement are disabilities that prevent the insured from performing all of his/her job functions. This means that the insured is totally disabled, but only temporarily. The benefits are often in the form of weekly payments of a fixed sum stated in the policy.
   
	Back to Top
 
  
7. What is temporary partial disablement? 
  
Temporary partial disablement occurs when the insured is only capable of performing only part of his/her usual occupation after the occurrence of his/her injury. The disability is both partial and temporary. The benefits are often in the form of weekly payments of a fixed sum which is stated in the policy. However, the rate payable is lower than that payable under temporary total disablement. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
8. What is waiver of premium?  
  
Waiver of premium is the term used when the insurer gives up its right to collect a policy's premiums on the occurrence of some specified event. This waiver may be until the expiry or maturity of the policy or until the insured reaches a specific age. There are basically 2 versions of the waiver of premium benefit: 
Waiver of premium for disability benefit. This provides that the insured does not need to make any further premium payments if the insured becomes unable to work because of an accident or injury
Waiver of premium for payor benefit. This provides that the policyowner (or payor) will be exempted from making any further premium payments if the policyowner, not the insured (usually the child), dies or becomes disabled 
  
	Back to Top
 
   
9. What are dismemberment riders? 
  
Dismemberment riders are riders that provide benefits on the occurrence of dismemberment (and usually on death also). The dismemberment indemnity can cover any thing from the loss of two or more members to the loss of one toe. Accordingly, the benefits paid are in line with the extent of the loss. The benefits paid are usually a fixed percentage of the face amount of the rider. For example, the loss of two or more members would yield the full face amount of the rider to be payable whereas the loss of a toe (other than a big toe) would yield 2.5% of the face amount to be payable. 
 
	Back to Top
 
 
10. What are hospital and surgical riders? 
  
Hospital and surgical riders provide benefits covering expenses incurred during hospitalisation due to sickness or accident caused by bodily injury or otherwise. These riders usually provide the medical benefits on a reimbursement basis, in accordance with a specified schedule of benefits. There are basically 2 types of reimbursement:
Reimbursement with maximum benefit limits for each category of hospital expenses.
Reimbursement on "As Charge" basis
Most companies have now imposed a minimum co-insurance amount/deductible to be borne by the customer for each hospitalisation claim.
 
Furthermore, there is an aggregate maximum benefit amount that can be claimed annually or throughout the term of the policy.
 
Please note that most hospital and surgical riders would treat a subsequent visit to the hospital (within a certain period from the first visit) as a continuation of the first visit in determining the amount of benefit to be paid, if the cause of the subsequent visit is the same as or related to that of the first visit.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
11. What are hospitalisation benefit riders? 
  
Hospitalisation benefit riders provide, in the event the insured is hospitalised, and regardless of the actual hospital expenses incurred, a daily benefit equal to an elected fixed amount. The benefit is payable up to a maximum number of days.
 
The rationale for hospitalisation benefit riders is to compensate the insured for the loss of income that he/she would have earned if he/she were not hospitalised. Therefore, the benefit payable has no regard for the actual hospital expenses incurred. It primarily takes into account the loss of income suffered by the insured. Compared to hospital and surgical riders in which the benefit payable depends on the actual hospital expenses incurred, there is usually a minimum age at entry for hospitalisation benefit riders. This is because people below the minimum entry age are not usually gainfully employed, and hence, there would be no loss of income if they were admitted to the hospital. However, these people can be covered for hospital and surgical benefits.
 
Please note that most hospitalisation benefit riders cover periods of rest at home as well as in the hospital. The rationale for this is the same as for the above; the insured still suffers a loss of income while resting at home.
 
	Back to Top
 
  
12. What are payor benefit riders? 
  
Payor benefit riders are riders that provide for the waiver of premium on a juvenile policy when the policyowner dies or becomes totally and permanently disabled.
 
	Back to Top

  
13. What are payor protection benefit riders? 
  
Payor protection benefit riders provide protection to the policyowner in the form of a lump sum payment to the beneficiary, equal to the face amount of the rider. These riders usually cover the death of the policyowner, but could also include cover for total and permanent disability. The lump sum benefit is usually used to pay the premiums for the juvenile policy of which the policyowner was the payor. As such, these riders can only be attached to juvenile policies.

	Back to Top
 
 
14. What are family income benefit riders? 
  
Family income benefit riders provide a regular stream of income to the family members of the insured when he/she dies. The first installment commences immediately after the death of the insured and the benefits will be discontinued after a certain date.
 
Therefore, the earlier the insured dies, the more the insurer will be liable to pay. These riders are essentially a form of decreasing term insurance. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
15. What are medilife riders?
  
Medilife riders are riders that provide benefits on the diagnosis or occurrence of a dread disease. The benefits are usually payable in one lump sum although there are some medilife riders that provide an initial benefit amount (equal to a fixed percentage of the face amount) on diagnosis or occurrence, and subsequently, a monthly benefit amount is payable until the full face amount is exhausted. 
These riders usually have a waiting period to protect against moral hazards. It could be anywhere from 30 to 90 days after the issue date of the rider. Furthermore, the insured usually has to survive for a certain number of days after the date of diagnosis or occurrence. This is because the benefits of the medilife riders are meant for the insured (but not the beneficiary) to cover for hospital and surgical expenses incurred, and the loss of income suffered. The benefits would not be needed if the insured were not alive. You might be thinking that the beneficiary (or beneficiaries for that matter) will still need the financial support, especially if the insured was the breadwinner. However, this need should be covered by the insured's basic plan of insurance.
 
The risks which are usually excluded are: 
 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) antibody, either before or after the issue date of the rider;
Life-threatening disease which is due to a pre-existing condition at the issue date of the rider; and
Life-threatening disease which is caused by alcohol or drug abuse, attempted suicide, or 
intentional self-inflicted injury, whether caused directly or indirectly.   
	Back to Top
 
 
16. What are cash dividend riders?  
  
Cash dividend riders are riders that participate in the profits of the insurance company. These riders provide cash dividends at the end of every year. These cash dividends can either be withdrawn or kept with the company. If they are kept with the company, they will earn interest at a certain specified rate.
 
In addition, there will be persistency and terminal cash dividends as well. The former is paid after the rider has been in force for a certain period of time and continues to be paid every, say, five years as long as the rider is still in force. The terminal cash dividends are payable on the death of the insured, if the rider has been in force for a certain period of time.
 
The cash dividend payments are not guaranteed and they depend on the results of the annual actuarial valuation of the company.
 
The company actuary will then determine the payments. However, sometimes the first few cash dividend payments, which are payable annually, are guaranteed.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
17. What are reversionary bonus riders? 
  
Reversionary (The word reversionary means that the bonuses will revert back to the policyholder at the end of the rider term) bonus riders are riders that participate in the profits of the insurance company by way of annual reversionary bonuses. These bonuses can either be on a simple or compound interest basis; usually the latter basis is used. They are kept with the company until the rider is terminated. Should the bonuses be withdrawn by the policyholder, only the surrender value (or cash value) of the bonuses would be received.
 
In addition, there will be claims and maturity bonuses as well. The claims bonus would be payable on the death of the insured, provided the rider has been in force for a certain period of time. On the other hand, the maturity bonus would be payable on maturity only.
 
Usually, the above bonuses are not guaranteed.
How is premium calculated?
  
The premium is calculated based on three major factors: 
The rate of mortality
Mortality tables are used when determining the rate of mortality. These tables are constructed by making observations of past experience, and projecting the trends observed into the future by forecasting the expected number of deaths. This is based on the assumption that the rate of deaths among a group of people of the same age in the future will be similar to that of a known group in the past. Higher mortality means higher premiums will be charged, and vice versa except for riders or plans that continue to pay only when the insured is alive. Examples of the latter are cash dividend and reversionary bonus riders. 
The rate of interest  
This is the interest rate the insurer expects to earn on its funds and/or investments. It directly affects the level of premium that will be charged. For example, if the insurer expects to earn high interest on its investment, it will charge a lower premium, and vice versa.
The expense factor  
These are the expenses that the insurer incur as a result of issuing the policy. The determination of the expenses that will be incurred is based on the assumption that operating costs will follow some patterns based on past experience, adjusted for inflation. It is obvious that the higher the expenses, the higher the premiums will be, and vice versa. 
Therefore, all three factors above will be taken into account in calculating the premium.
 
Usually the premium rate derived is presented in a table or tables and expressed as premium per thousand RM of face amount. Depending on the age of insured and where relevant, the length of period of coverage, a premium rate is extracted from such tables. Sometimes there are separate tables for male and female insureds. If not, the premium rate table provided is assumed to be for males and when reading for female rates, a certain number of years are subtracted or added to actual age before being read from the table. Sometimes, there are separate tables for each face amount band. If not, a fixed amount may be added or subtracted from the table rate depending on whether the face amount is below the lower threshold or greater than the higher threshold, respectively. Furthermore, if the insured is considered to be a medically preferred risk, the premium rate is reduced or increased by a certain amount. Often there is a further reduction for non-smoking insureds. Finally, if chosen frequency of payment is not annual, a modal premium adjustment is applied.
 
	Back to Top
  
 
2. What is policy size adjustment? 
  
Policy size adjustment is basically a premium reduction (sometimes it can be an addition to the premium if the policy has a small sum assured) in respect of large insurances. This is because to an insurer the cost of issuing a policy with a large sum insured is virtually the same as that of issuing a policy with a smaller sum insured. Book-keeping, policy preparation, postal, and clerical costs are the same in both cases. Therefore, the insurer gives an incentive to the policyowner who purchases a policy with a large sum insured by reducing his premiums. 
  
	Back to Top
 
  
3. What is preferred risk adjustment? 
  
Preferred risk adjustment is a reduction in premiums accorded to policyholders who are considered to be good risks. These people are usually engaged in non-hazardous occupations and are of good health. Sometimes, there are other conditions to be met (e.g. certain products must be purchased and/or the sum assured must exceed a certain amount) in order for this preferred risk adjustment to be applicable. 
  
	Back to Top
 

4. What is a non-smoker adjustment?  
  
A non-smoker adjustment is a discount or reduction in the premiums payable by non-smokers. It is generally accepted that non-smokers, on average, live longer than smokers. Therefore, non-smokers (who present less risk exposure) are entitled to lower premiums. 
 
Most of the time, the reduction allowed depends upon the age of the insured and also the product purchased. The proposer will generally be asked to declare (in the proposal form) that he/she does not smoke and has not smoked for the last 12 months.
  
	Back to Top

 
5. What are female rates? 
  
As the name suggests, female rates are premium rates applicable to females. It has been statistically proven that females generally live longer (ie. have lower mortality) than males of the same age group. To truly reflect the difference in risks presented to the insurer by the two groups of sexes, the premium rates for females are lower than those for males of the same ages. 
 
However, for medilife insurance (also known as living assurance or dread disease riders), female rates are higher because their morbidity (sickness) rate is higher than males.
 
Please note that separate females rates may not exist for certain products and/or ages.
  
	Back to Top
 

6. What are modal premium adjustments?  
  
Modal premium adjustments are adjustments that are made to the annual premium in order to determine the appropriate amount to be paid at each premium due date for the mode of payment chosen. For example, if a policyholder decides to pay premiums on a half-yearly basis, the modal premium would be slightly more than half of the annual premium.
 
Similarly, the policyholder can choose to pay his/her premiums on a quarterly or monthly basis. The annual premium will be adjusted accordingly to yield the modal premium.
 
Please note that the mode of payment selected will sometimes affect the length of the grace period. You will need to check your policy provisions carefully to determine if any restrictions apply. 
 
 	Back to Top
 

7. What is stamp duty? 
  
Stamp duty is the tax that is levied on the policy document. It can be fulfilled in two ways: 
Purchasing and putting on the document, an adhesive stamp of the value required, and cancelling. In this case, cancelling refers to the endorsement of the stamp duty and is represented by a chop or print on the stamp itself.
Paying money of the value required, to the stamp duty office which then impresses a stamp to that value on the document. 
	Back to Top
 

8. What is underwriting?  
  
Underwriting is the term used to describe the process of accessing risks (the proposed insureds) and classifying these risks into various groups in respect of the premiums to be charged. Based on the degree of risk that a proposed insured presents, the insurer decides whether to accept or decline an application for insurance. The level of premium rates has to be monitored constantly for a life insurance company to remain competitive.
A typical classification of risks in respect of premiums to be charged would be: 
To accept the risk on standard rates 
To accept the risk, but with a loading (i.e. extra premium) or lien (i.e. with a reduced sum insured that is gradually increased to a maximum within a certain period providing that the health of the insured improves)
To defer the risk until such time it becomes acceptable 
To reject the risk  
	Back to Top
 

9. What is loading or extra premium? 
  
Loading or extra premium is the amount that is added to the standard premium in respect of the larger than standard risk presented by the proposer or life assured. This could be the case if the proposer, for example, has suffered or is suffering from an injury and/or illness considered serious enough to warrant a premium loading. Or the proposer could be engaged in a hazardous occupation; or the proposer could have dangerous hobbies or pastimes; etc. 
 
When a loading is required on the proposed insured, a letter will be issued to the proposer as a counter-offer, indicating the loading required. If the proposer agrees to the terms and conditions imposed on his/her application, he/she will need to sign a letter of consent or acceptance and send it back to the insurer.
 
	Back to Top
 
 
10. How can loading or extra premium be avoided? 
  
Heavy smokers can avoid loading or extra premium by giving up smoking. Smokers generally pay up to 50% more for life insurance than healthy non-smokers.
 
The proposed insured should never resort to suppressing information such as poor health condition in your application to avoid the extra premium. This practice is likely to lead to a repudiated claim in the event of the insured's death. 
 
	Back to Top
 
 
11. What are the essential documents that the life insurer needs to approve my application for a policy? 
  
The essential documents that the life insurer needs to approve your application for a policy are:
An application for life insurance form. This is also the same as the proposal form and will be made a part of the policy contract
A medical examination report (MER) is required if the sum assured applied for is greater than the non-medical limit of the insurer
An attending physician statement (APS) is required if you have suffered or are suffering from an injury and/or illness which the underwriter thinks may have a material impact on the risk presented
An agent's confidential report is required if if there are information and circumstances which are apparent and not revealed in the application and are material to underwriting
Effective 1 July 2004, all applications for life insurance polices must be submitted together with the Customer Information Form (CIF) and Confirmation of Advice Form (CAF). The Bank Negara Malaysia Guidelines on Proper Advice Practices for Life Insurance Business sets the minimum standard for proper advice as well as a structured process for advising and selling life insurance products by insurance intermediaries. The primary purpose of the guidelines is to ensure that an intermediary obtains sufficient information about a prospective policyowner before giving advice on the suitability of a particular life insurance product to the prospective customer
For Manulife Insurance Berhad, the intermediary is our agent. 
  
	Back to Top
 
 
12. What are my premium paying options?  
  
You have a number of premium paying options regarding frequencies and methods of payment. For the frequency of payment, premiums for an Ordinary Life insurance policy may be paid on the following basis:
Yearly
Half-yearly 
Quarterly
Monthly (If this mode of payment is chosen, many life insurers require payment of premiums to be made through Banker's Order, AutoDebit or payroll deduction schemes) 
Home Service policies provide frequency of payment of even shorter durations such as weekly. However, in Malaysia, some of the Home Service life insurers will no longer sell new Home Service business with weekly payment frequency 
  
For the method of payment, premiums can be paid through any of the following ways: 
You can pay the premium due (in cash or cheque) direct to the insurer's offices
Alternatively, an agent who is authorised by the insurer may collect the premium due on the insurer's behalf
Payment by post using cheque, postal, money order or bankdraft. If your cheque is dishonoured, the receipt issued by the insurer will be deemed invalid
Banker's order 
You will need to instruct your banker to remit the required premium from your account to the insurer every month. This method of payment can also be used if the mode of payment is on a quarterly, half-yearly or yearly basis
AutoDebit 
Many banks like MayBank operate a scheme whereby an accountholder can authorise the bank to accept instruction from a specified party to transfer an amount up to the maximum specified by the accountholder. This method is cheaper than banker's order and is more flexible as the insurer can vary the amount within the limit set by the bank accountholder.
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) 
Many banks like MayBank, Public Bank, etc. allow ATM cardholders to pay to specified parties through their ATMs. Policyowners who enjoy such facilities can use it to pay their premium when due, provided that they have applied for such facilities with their bank.
Credit Card
Most life insurers now allow its customers to pay premiums using Credit Card auto-debt services, free-of-charge. This method is becoming more popular as it provides a hassle-free premium payment service.
Online Payment
You can also pay your insurance premium using internet via your bank's internet facility. (www.maybank2u.com.my, www.pbebank.com.my, etc…)
Salary deduction or payroll scheme
Under this method of payment, your employer will need to agree to deduct the monthly installment of premiums from your salary. Your employer will need your consent in the form of a written instruction. Furthermore, your employer will need to obtain prior approval from the Labour Department for such deductions. 
	Back to Top

13. What is a face amount? 
  
Each basic plan and most riders have a face amount which is stated in RM and used to compute the annual premium. After computing the premium rate, the annual premium is computed by multiplying the face amount with the premium rate and dividing by 1000. This is because the premium rate is by custom always stated as a rate per 1000 of sum insured. 
 
For term plans and riders, the face amount is the sum insured which is what the beneficiary will get if the insured dies. For other riders like compound reversionary bonus and cash dividend riders there is usually a rule of thumb formula provided by the actuary that will allow the agent to compute the face amount that will result in a desired benefit amount. For such riders, this face amount is only a notional amount and is not the amount payable on death and/or maturity.
 What is a suicide clause?  

A suicide clause is a condition incorporated in the policy to prevent claims from suicides, whether sane or insane, within a fixed period of time from the policy's issue date. In cases like this, the insurer will refund the premiums paid. 
 
The fixed period, as mentioned above, ranges from one to two years, depending on the insurer and the type of product purchased. The purpose of this clause is to discourage people with suicidal intentions from buying a policy with the intention of benefiting their families after their planned death.
   
	Back to Top
 
  
2. What is an incontestability clause?  
  
The incontestability clause prevents the insurer from calling into question a policy, after the expiry of two years from the date on which it was effected, on the basis that there was a misrepresentation in the proposal form or medical report or any document which led to the issue of the policy.
 
Please note that the insurer can void the policy even after expiry of the contestable period if fraudulent misrepresentation on a material fact by the policyowner can be proved.
 
	Back to Top
 

3. How can my beneficiaries make a claim upon my death? 
  
Your beneficiaries can make a claim by furnishing three pieces of evidence:
Proof of death 
Depending on the cause and circumstances of death, different documents will be required. However, the Certificate of Death is always required. This will show the name, sex, occupation, age, time of death, place of death, residence, place of birth, names of parents, marital status, cause of death, duration of last illness, time and place of burial and death certification officer of the insured.
Proof of age 
The usual documents required are birth certificate, identity card, baptism certificate, statutory declaration or school certificate, citizenship certificate, and passport. 
Proof of title and ownership at death 
The policy contract with your beneficiaries' names stated in the beneficiary's details section will be needed. If no one was named as a beneficiary, there will be different means by which the claimants (presumably your relatives) can obtain the proceeds of the policy.  
	Back to Top
 
 
4. How can I claim the maturity benefits (if any) of my policy?
  
You can claim the maturity benefits of your policy by fulfilling the following requirements:
You must produce the policy. 
You will need to complete an identity form which shows your date of birth and your signature. These will assist the claims processor in determining whether you are the rightful beneficiary of these maturity benefits.
If you are not the life insured of the policy (but are the policyowner), then you will need a statement from the insured stating that he/she is still alive for policies or riders that pay only if the insured is still alive.
What is anticipated endowment?	 
An anticipated endowment is an endowment policy with guaranteed cash payments payable to the policyowner at regular intervals during the term of the policy. The full sum assured will still be payable should the insured die during the term of the policy. However, if the insured survives till the end of the term, then he/she will receive only the balance of the sum assured (usually 50% of the original sum assured).
This type of endowment allows the policyowner to receive payments earlier. This is in contrast to the normal endowment policy in which the policyowner has to wait until the end of the term in order to receive the full sum insured.
 What is a suicide clause?  

A suicide clause is a condition incorporated in the policy to prevent claims from suicides, whether sane or insane, within a fixed period of time from the policy's issue date. In cases like this, the insurer will refund the premiums paid. 
 
The fixed period, as mentioned above, ranges from one to two years, depending on the insurer and the type of product purchased. The purpose of this clause is to discourage people with suicidal intentions from buying a policy with the intention of benefiting their families after their planned death.
   
	Back to Top
 
  
2. What is an incontestability clause?  
  
The incontestability clause prevents the insurer from calling into question a policy, after the expiry of two years from the date on which it was effected, on the basis that there was a misrepresentation in the proposal form or medical report or any document which led to the issue of the policy.
 
Please note that the insurer can void the policy even after expiry of the contestable period if fraudulent misrepresentation on a material fact by the policyowner can be proved.
 
	Back to Top
 

3. How can my beneficiaries make a claim upon my death? 
  
Your beneficiaries can make a claim by furnishing three pieces of evidence:
Proof of death 
Depending on the cause and circumstances of death, different documents will be required. However, the Certificate of Death is always required. This will show the name, sex, occupation, age, time of death, place of death, residence, place of birth, names of parents, marital status, cause of death, duration of last illness, time and place of burial and death certification officer of the insured.
Proof of age 
The usual documents required are birth certificate, identity card, baptism certificate, statutory declaration or school certificate, citizenship certificate, and passport. 
Proof of title and ownership at death 
The policy contract with your beneficiaries' names stated in the beneficiary's details section will be needed. If no one was named as a beneficiary, there will be different means by which the claimants (presumably your relatives) can obtain the proceeds of the policy.  
	Back to Top
 
 
4. How can I claim the maturity benefits (if any) of my policy?
  
You can claim the maturity benefits of your policy by fulfilling the following requirements:
You must produce the policy. 
You will need to complete an identity form which shows your date of birth and your signature. These will assist the claims processor in determining whether you are the rightful beneficiary of these maturity benefits.
If you are not the life insured of the policy (but are the policyowner), then you will need a statement from the insured stating that he/she is still alive for policies or riders that pay only if the insured is still alive.
Insurance is the equitable transfer of the risk of a loss, from one entity to another in exchange for payment. It is a form of risk management primarily used to hedge against the risk of a contingent, uncertain loss. An insurer, or insurance carrier, is a company selling the insurance; the insured, or policyholder, is the person or entity buying the insurance policy. The amount of money to be charged for a certain amount of insurance coverage is called the premium. Risk management, the practice of appraising and controlling risk, has evolved as a discrete field of study and practice.

The transaction involves the insured assuming a guaranteed and known relatively small loss in the form of payment to the insurer in exchange for the insurer's promise to compensate (indemnify) the insured in the case of a financial (personal) loss. The insured receives a contract, called the insurance policy, which details the conditions and circumstances under which the insured will be financially compensated.

Contents  [hide] 
1 History
1.1 Early methods
1.2 Modern insurance
2 Principles
2.1 Insurability
2.2 Legal
2.3 Indemnification
3 Societal effects
3.1 Methods of insurance
4 Insurers' business model
4.1 Underwriting and investing
4.2 Claims
4.3 Marketing
5 Types of insurance
5.1 Auto insurance
5.1.1 Gap insurance
5.2 Health insurance
5.3 Accident, sickness, and unemployment insurance
5.4 Casualty
5.5 Life
5.5.1 Burial insurance
5.6 Property
5.7 Liability
5.8 Credit
5.9 Other types
5.10 Insurance financing vehicles
5.11 Closed community self-insurance
6 Insurance companies
7 Across the world
7.1 Regulatory differences
8 Controversies
8.1 Insurance insulates too much
8.2 Complexity of insurance policy contracts
8.3 Limited consumer benefits
8.4 Redlining
8.5 Insurance patents
8.6 The insurance industry and rent-seeking
8.7 Religious concerns
9 See also
10 Notes
11 Bibliography
12 External links
§History[edit]
Main article: History of insurance
§Early methods[edit]

Merchants have sought methods to minimize risks since early times. Pictured, Governors of the Wine Merchant's Guild by Ferdinand Bol, c. 1680.
Methods for transferring or distributing risk were practiced by Chinese and Babylonian traders as long ago as the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC, respectively.[1] Chinese merchants travelling treacherous river rapids would redistribute their wares across many vessels to limit the loss due to any single vessel's capsizing. The Babylonians developed a system which was recorded in the famous Code of Hammurabi, c. 1750 BC, and practiced by early Mediterranean sailing merchants. If a merchant received a loan to fund his shipment, he would pay the lender an additional sum in exchange for the lender's guarantee to cancel the loan should the shipment be stolen or lost at sea.

At some point in the 1st millennium BC, the inhabitants of Rhodes created the 'general average'. This allowed groups of merchants to pay to insure their goods being shipped together. The collected premiums would be used to reimburse any merchant whose goods were jettisoned during transport, whether to storm or sinkage.[2]

Separate insurance contracts (i.e., insurance policies not bundled with loans or other kinds of contracts) were invented in Genoa in the 14th century, as were insurance pools backed by pledges of landed estates. The first known insurance contract dates from Genoa in 1347, and in the next century maritime insurance developed widely and premiums were intuitively varied with risks.[3] These new insurance contracts allowed insurance to be separated from investment, a separation of roles that first proved useful in marine insurance.

§Modern insurance[edit]
Insurance became far more sophisticated in Enlightenment era Europe, and specialized varieties developed.


Lloyd's Coffee House was the first marine insurance company.
Property insurance as we know it today can be traced to the Great Fire of London, which in 1666 devoured more than 13,000 houses. The devastating effects of the fire converted the development of insurance "from a matter of convenience into one of urgency, a change of opinion reflected in Sir Christopher Wren's inclusion of a site for 'the Insurance Office' in his new plan for London in 1667".[4] A number of attempted fire insurance schemes came to nothing, but in 1681, economist Nicholas Barbon and eleven associates established the first fire insurance company, the "Insurance Office for Houses", at the back of the Royal Exchange to insure brick and frame homes. Initially, 5,000 homes were insured by his Insurance Office.[5]

At the same time, the first insurance schemes for the underwriting of business ventures became available. By the end of the seventeenth century, London's growing importance as a centre for trade was increasing demand for marine insurance. In the late 1680s, Edward Lloyd opened a coffee house, which became the meeting place for parties in the shipping industry wishing to insure cargoes and ships, and those willing to underwrite such ventures. These informal beginnings led to the establishment of the insurance market Lloyd's of London and several related shipping and insurance businesses.[6]


Leaflet promoting the National Insurance Act 1911.
The first life insurance policies were taken out in the early 18th century. The first company to offer life insurance was the Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office, founded in London in 1706 by William Talbot and Sir Thomas Allen.[7][8] Edward Rowe Mores established the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorship in 1762.

It was the world's first mutual insurer and it pioneered age based premiums based on mortality rate laying "the framework for scientific insurance practice and development" and "the basis of modern life assurance upon which all life assurance schemes were subsequently based".[9]

In the late 19th century, "accident insurance" began to become available. This operated much like modern disability insurance.[10][11] The first company to offer accident insurance was the Railway Passengers Assurance Company, formed in 1848 in England to insure against the rising number of fatalities on the nascent railway system.

By the late 19th century, governments began to initiate national insurance programs against sickness and old age. Germany built on a tradition of welfare programs in Prussia and Saxony that began as early as in the 1840s. In the 1880s Chancellor Otto von Bismarck introduced old age pensions, accident insurance and medical care that formed the basis for Germany's welfare state.[12][13] In Britain more extensive legislation was introduced by the Liberal government in the 1911 National Insurance Act. This gave the British working classes the first contributory system of insurance against illness and unemployment.[14] This system was greatly expanded after the Second World War under the influence of the Beveridge Report, to form the first modern welfare state.[12][15]

§Principles[edit]
Insurance involves pooling funds from many insured entities (known as exposures) to pay for the losses that some may incur. The insured entities are therefore protected from risk for a fee, with the fee being dependent upon the frequency and severity of the event occurring. In order to be an insurable risk, the risk insured against must meet certain characteristics. Insurance as a financial intermediary is a commercial enterprise and a major part of the financial services industry, but individual entities can also self-insure through saving money for possible future losses.[16]

§Insurability[edit]
Main article: Insurability
Risk which can be insured by private companies typically shares seven common characteristics:[17]

Large number of similar exposure units: Since insurance operates through pooling resources, the majority of insurance policies are provided for individual members of large classes, allowing insurers to benefit from the law of large numbers in which predicted losses are similar to the actual losses. Exceptions include Lloyd's of London, which is famous for insuring the life or health of actors, sports figures, and other famous individuals. However, all exposures will have particular differences, which may lead to different premium rates.
Definite loss: The loss takes place at a known time, in a known place, and from a known cause. The classic example is death of an insured person on a life insurance policy. Fire, automobile accidents, and worker injuries may all easily meet this criterion. Other types of losses may only be definite in theory. Occupational disease, for instance, may involve prolonged exposure to injurious conditions where no specific time, place, or cause is identifiable. Ideally, the time, place, and cause of a loss should be clear enough that a reasonable person, with sufficient information, could objectively verify all three elements.
Accidental loss: The event that constitutes the trigger of a claim should be fortuitous, or at least outside the control of the beneficiary of the insurance. The loss should be pure, in the sense that it results from an event for which there is only the opportunity for cost. Events that contain speculative elements, such as ordinary business risks or even purchasing a lottery ticket, are generally not considered insurable.
Large loss: The size of the loss must be meaningful from the perspective of the insured. Insurance premiums need to cover both the expected cost of losses, plus the cost of issuing and administering the policy, adjusting losses, and supplying the capital needed to reasonably assure that the insurer will be able to pay claims. For small losses, these latter costs may be several times the size of the expected cost of losses. There is hardly any point in paying such costs unless the protection offered has real value to a buyer.
Affordable premium: If the likelihood of an insured event is so high, or the cost of the event so large, that the resulting premium is large relative to the amount of protection offered, then it is not likely that the insurance will be purchased, even if on offer. Furthermore, as the accounting profession formally recognizes in financial accounting standards, the premium cannot be so large that there is not a reasonable chance of a significant loss to the insurer. If there is no such chance of loss, then the transaction may have the form of insurance, but not the substance (see the U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board pronouncement number 113: "Accounting and Reporting for Reinsurance of Short-Duration and Long-Duration Contracts").
Calculable loss: There are two elements that must be at least estimable, if not formally calculable: the probability of loss, and the attendant cost. Probability of loss is generally an empirical exercise, while cost has more to do with the ability of a reasonable person in possession of a copy of the insurance policy and a proof of loss associated with a claim presented under that policy to make a reasonably definite and objective evaluation of the amount of the loss recoverable as a result of the claim.
Limited risk of catastrophically large losses: Insurable losses are ideally independent and non-catastrophic, meaning that the losses do not happen all at once and individual losses are not severe enough to bankrupt the insurer; insurers may prefer to limit their exposure to a loss from a single event to some small portion of their capital base. Capital constrains insurers' ability to sell earthquake insurance as well as wind insurance in hurricane zones. In the United States, flood risk is insured by the federal government. In commercial fire insurance, it is possible to find single properties whose total exposed value is well in excess of any individual insurer's capital constraint. Such properties are generally shared among several insurers, or are insured by a single insurer who syndicates the risk into the reinsurance market.
§Legal[edit]
When a company insures an individual entity, there are basic legal requirements and regulations. Several commonly cited legal principles of insurance include:[18]

Indemnity – the insurance company indemnifies, or compensates, the insured in the case of certain losses only up to the insured's interest.
Benefit insurance – as it is stated in the study books of The Chartered Insurance Institute, the insurance company doesn't have the right of recovery from the party who caused the injury and is to compensate the Insured regardless of the fact that Insured had already sued the negligent party for the damages (for example, personal accident insurance)
Insurable interest – the insured typically must directly suffer from the loss. Insurable interest must exist whether property insurance or insurance on a person is involved. The concept requires that the insured have a "stake" in the loss or damage to the life or property insured. What that "stake" is will be determined by the kind of insurance involved and the nature of the property ownership or relationship between the persons. The requirement of an insurable interest is what distinguishes insurance from gambling.
Utmost good faith – (Uberrima fides) the insured and the insurer are bound by a good faith bond of honesty and fairness. Material facts must be disclosed.
Contribution – insurers which have similar obligations to the insured contribute in the indemnification, according to some method.
Subrogation – the insurance company acquires legal rights to pursue recoveries on behalf of the insured; for example, the insurer may sue those liable for the insured's loss. The Insurers can waive their subrogation rights by using the special clauses.
Causa proxima, or proximate cause – the cause of loss (the peril) must be covered under the insuring agreement of the policy, and the dominant cause must not be excluded
Mitigation – In case of any loss or casualty, the asset owner must attempt to keep loss to a minimum, as if the asset was not insured.
§Indemnification[edit]
Main article: Indemnity
To "indemnify" means to make whole again, or to be reinstated to the position that one was in, to the extent possible, prior to the happening of a specified event or peril. Accordingly, life insurance is generally not considered to be indemnity insurance, but rather "contingent" insurance (i.e., a claim arises on the occurrence of a specified event). There are generally three types of insurance contracts that seek to indemnify an insured:

A "reimbursement" policy
A "pay on behalf" or "on behalf of" policy[19]
An "indemnification" policy
From an insured's standpoint, the result is usually the same: the insurer pays the loss and claims expenses.

If the Insured has a "reimbursement" policy, the insured can be required to pay for a loss and then be "reimbursed" by the insurance carrier for the loss and out of pocket costs including, with the permission of the insurer, claim expenses.[19][20]

Under a "pay on behalf" policy, the insurance carrier would defend and pay a claim on behalf of the insured who would not be out of pocket for anything. Most modern liability insurance is written on the basis of "pay on behalf" language which enables the insurance carrier to manage and control the claim.

Under an "indemnification" policy, the insurance carrier can generally either "reimburse" or "pay on behalf of", whichever is more beneficial to it and the insured in the claim handling process.

An entity seeking to transfer risk (an individual, corporation, or association of any type, etc.) becomes the 'insured' party once risk is assumed by an 'insurer', the insuring party, by means of a contract, called an insurance policy. Generally, an insurance contract includes, at a minimum, the following elements: identification of participating parties (the insurer, the insured, the beneficiaries), the premium, the period of coverage, the particular loss event covered, the amount of coverage (i.e., the amount to be paid to the insured or beneficiary in the event of a loss), and exclusions (events not covered). An insured is thus said to be "indemnified" against the loss covered in the policy.

When insured parties experience a loss for a specified peril, the coverage entitles the policyholder to make a claim against the insurer for the covered amount of loss as specified by the policy. The fee paid by the insured to the insurer for assuming the risk is called the premium. Insurance premiums from many insureds are used to fund accounts reserved for later payment of claims – in theory for a relatively few claimants – and for overhead costs. So long as an insurer maintains adequate funds set aside for anticipated losses (called reserves), the remaining margin is an insurer's profit.

§Societal effects[edit]
Insurance can have various effects on society through the way that it changes who bears the cost of losses and damage. On one hand it can increase fraud; on the other it can help societies and individuals prepare for catastrophes and mitigate the effects of catastrophes on both households and societies.

Insurance can influence the probability of losses through moral hazard, insurance fraud, and preventive steps by the insurance company. Insurance scholars have typically used moral hazard to refer to the increased loss due to unintentional carelessness and moral hazard to refer to increased risk due to intentional carelessness or indifference.[21] Insurers attempt to address carelessness through inspections, policy provisions requiring certain types of maintenance, and possible discounts for loss mitigation efforts. While in theory insurers could encourage investment in loss reduction, some commentators have argued that in practice insurers had historically not aggressively pursued loss control measures—particularly to prevent disaster losses such as hurricanes—because of concerns over rate reductions and legal battles. However, since about 1996 insurers have begun to take a more active role in loss mitigation, such as through building codes.[22]

§Methods of insurance[edit]
In accordance with study books of The Chartered Insurance Institute, there are the following types of insurance:

Co-insurance – risks shared between insurers
Dual insurance – risks having two or more policies with same coverage
Self-insurance – situations where risk is not transferred to insurance companies and solely retained by the entities or individuals themselves
Reinsurance – situations when Insurer passes some part of or all risks to another Insurer called Reinsurer
§Insurers' business model[edit]
File:Accidents will happen William-H.-Watson-Universal-Star-Featurette-1922-EYE FLM1205-OB 687097-720x404.ogv.webm
Accidents will happen (William H. Watson, 1922) is a slapstick silent film about the methods and mishaps of an insurance broker. Collection EYE Film Institute Netherlands.
§Underwriting and investing[edit]
The business model is to collect more in premium and investment income than is paid out in losses, and to also offer a competitive price which consumers will accept. Profit can be reduced to a simple equation:

Profit = earned premium + investment income – incurred loss – underwriting expenses.
Insurers make money in two ways:

Through underwriting, the process by which insurers select the risks to insure and decide how much in premiums to charge for accepting those risks
By investing the premiums they collect from insured parties
The most complicated aspect of the insurance business is the actuarial science of ratemaking (price-setting) of policies, which uses statistics and probability to approximate the rate of future claims based on a given risk. After producing rates, the insurer will use discretion to reject or accept risks through the underwriting process.

At the most basic level, initial ratemaking involves looking at the frequency and severity of insured perils and the expected average payout resulting from these perils. Thereafter an insurance company will collect historical loss data, bring the loss data to present value, and compare these prior losses to the premium collected in order to assess rate adequacy.[23] Loss ratios and expense loads are also used. Rating for different risk characteristics involves at the most basic level comparing the losses with "loss relativities"—a policy with twice as many losses would therefore be charged twice as much. More complex multivariate analyses are sometimes used when multiple characteristics are involved and a univariate analysis could produce confounded results. Other statistical methods may be used in assessing the probability of future losses.

Upon termination of a given policy, the amount of premium collected minus the amount paid out in claims is the insurer's underwriting profit on that policy. Underwriting performance is measured by something called the "combined ratio", which is the ratio of expenses/losses to premiums.[24] A combined ratio of less than 100% indicates an underwriting profit, while anything over 100 indicates an underwriting loss. A company with a combined ratio over 100% may nevertheless remain profitable due to investment earnings.

Insurance companies earn investment profits on "float". Float, or available reserve, is the amount of money on hand at any given moment that an insurer has collected in insurance premiums but has not paid out in claims. Insurers start investing insurance premiums as soon as they are collected and continue to earn interest or other income on them until claims are paid out. The Association of British Insurers (gathering 400 insurance companies and 94% of UK insurance services) has almost 20% of the investments in the London Stock Exchange.[25]

In the United States, the underwriting loss of property and casualty insurance companies was $142.3 billion in the five years ending 2003. But overall profit for the same period was $68.4 billion, as the result of float. Some insurance industry insiders, most notably Hank Greenberg, do not believe that it is forever possible to sustain a profit from float without an underwriting profit as well, but this opinion is not universally held.

Naturally, the float method is difficult to carry out in an economically depressed period. Bear markets do cause insurers to shift away from investments and to toughen up their underwriting standards, so a poor economy generally means high insurance premiums. This tendency to swing between profitable and unprofitable periods over time is commonly known as the underwriting, or insurance, cycle.[26]

§Claims[edit]
Claims and loss handling is the materialized utility of insurance; it is the actual "product" paid for. Claims may be filed by insureds directly with the insurer or through brokers or agents. The insurer may require that the claim be filed on its own proprietary forms, or may accept claims on a standard industry form, such as those produced by ACORD.

Insurance company claims departments employ a large number of claims adjusters supported by a staff of records management and data entry clerks. Incoming claims are classified based on severity and are assigned to adjusters whose settlement authority varies with their knowledge and experience. The adjuster undertakes an investigation of each claim, usually in close cooperation with the insured, determines if coverage is available under the terms of the insurance contract, and if so, the reasonable monetary value of the claim, and authorizes payment.

The policyholder may hire their own public adjuster to negotiate the settlement with the insurance company on their behalf. For policies that are complicated, where claims may be complex, the insured may take out a separate insurance policy add on, called loss recovery insurance, which covers the cost of a public adjuster in the case of a claim.

Adjusting liability insurance claims is particularly difficult because there is a third party involved, the plaintiff, who is under no contractual obligation to cooperate with the insurer and may in fact regard the insurer as a deep pocket. The adjuster must obtain legal counsel for the insured (either inside "house" counsel or outside "panel" counsel), monitor litigation that may take years to complete, and appear in person or over the telephone with settlement authority at a mandatory settlement conference when requested by the judge.

If a claims adjuster suspects under-insurance, the condition of average may come into play to limit the insurance company's exposure.

In managing the claims handling function, insurers seek to balance the elements of customer satisfaction, administrative handling expenses, and claims overpayment leakages. As part of this balancing act, fraudulent insurance practices are a major business risk that must be managed and overcome. Disputes between insurers and insureds over the validity of claims or claims handling practices occasionally escalate into litigation (see insurance bad faith).

§Marketing[edit]
Insurers will often use insurance agents to initially market or underwrite their customers. Agents can be captive, meaning they write only for one company, or independent, meaning that they can issue policies from several companies. The existence and success of companies using insurance agents is likely due to improved and personalized service.[27]

§Types of insurance[edit]
Any risk that can be quantified can potentially be insured. Specific kinds of risk that may give rise to claims are known as perils. An insurance policy will set out in detail which perils are covered by the policy and which are not. Below are non-exhaustive lists of the many different types of insurance that exist. A single policy may cover risks in one or more of the categories set out below. For example, vehicle insurance would typically cover both the property risk (theft or damage to the vehicle) and the liability risk (legal claims arising from an accident). A home insurance policy in the United States typically includes coverage for damage to the home and the owner's belongings, certain legal claims against the owner, and even a small amount of coverage for medical expenses of guests who are injured on the owner's property.

Business insurance can take a number of different forms, such as the various kinds of professional liability insurance, also called professional indemnity (PI), which are discussed below under that name; and the business owner's policy (BOP), which packages into one policy many of the kinds of coverage that a business owner needs, in a way analogous to how homeowners' insurance packages the coverages that a homeowner needs.[28]

§Auto insurance[edit]
Main article: Vehicle insurance

A wrecked vehicle in Copenhagen
Auto insurance protects the policyholder against financial loss in the event of an incident involving a vehicle they own, such as in a traffic collision.

Coverage typically includes:

Property coverage, for damage to or theft of the car
Liability coverage, for the legal responsibility to others for bodily injury or property damage
Medical coverage, for the cost of treating injuries, rehabilitation and sometimes lost wages and funeral expenses
§Gap insurance[edit]
Main article: Gap insurance
Gap insurance covers the excess amount on your auto loan in an instance where your insurance company does not cover the entire loan. Depending on the companies specific policies it might or might not cover the deductible as well. This coverage is marketed for those who put low down payments, have high interest rates on their loans, and those with 60 month or longer terms. Gap insurance is typically offered by your finance company when you first purchase your vehicle. Most auto insurance companies offer this coverage to consumers as well. If you are unsure if GAP coverage had been purchased, you should check your vehicle lease or purchase documentation.

§Health insurance[edit]
Main articles: Health insurance and Dental insurance

Great Western Hospital, Swindon
Health insurance policies cover the cost of medical treatments. Dental insurance, like medical insurance, protects policyholders for dental costs. In most developed countries, all citizens receive some health coverage from their governments, paid for by taxation. In most countries, health insurance is often part of an employer's benefits.

§Accident, sickness, and unemployment insurance[edit]

Workers' compensation, or employers' liability insurance, is compulsory in some countries
Disability insurance policies provide financial support in the event of the policyholder becoming unable to work because of disabling illness or injury. It provides monthly support to help pay such obligations as mortgage loans and credit cards. Short-term and long-term disability policies are available to individuals, but considering the expense, long-term policies are generally obtained only by those with at least six-figure incomes, such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Short-term disability insurance covers a person for a period typically up to six months, paying a stipend each month to cover medical bills and other necessities.
Long-term disability insurance covers an individual's expenses for the long term, up until such time as they are considered permanently disabled and thereafter. Insurance companies will often try to encourage the person back into employment in preference to and before declaring them unable to work at all and therefore totally disabled.
Disability overhead insurance allows business owners to cover the overhead expenses of their business while they are unable to work.
Total permanent disability insurance provides benefits when a person is permanently disabled and can no longer work in their profession, often taken as an adjunct to life insurance.
Workers' compensation insurance replaces all or part of a worker's wages lost and accompanying medical expenses incurred because of a job-related injury.
§Casualty[edit]
Main article: Casualty insurance
Casualty insurance insures against accidents, not necessarily tied to any specific property. It is a broad spectrum of insurance that a number of other types of insurance could be classified, such as auto, workers compensation, and some liability insurances.

Crime insurance is a form of casualty insurance that covers the policyholder against losses arising from the criminal acts of third parties. For example, a company can obtain crime insurance to cover losses arising from theft or embezzlement.
Political risk insurance is a form of casualty insurance that can be taken out by businesses with operations in countries in which there is a risk that revolution or other political conditions could result in a loss.
§Life[edit]
Main article: Life insurance

Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office, Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, London, 1801
Life insurance provides a monetary benefit to a decedent's family or other designated beneficiary, and may specifically provide for income to an insured person's family, burial, funeral and other final expenses. Life insurance policies often allow the option of having the proceeds paid to the beneficiary either in a lump sum cash payment or an annuity. In most states, a person cannot purchase a policy on another person without their knowledge.

Annuities provide a stream of payments and are generally classified as insurance because they are issued by insurance companies, are regulated as insurance, and require the same kinds of actuarial and investment management expertise that life insurance requires. Annuities and pensions that pay a benefit for life are sometimes regarded as insurance against the possibility that a retiree will outlive his or her financial resources. In that sense, they are the complement of life insurance and, from an underwriting perspective, are the mirror image of life insurance.

Certain life insurance contracts accumulate cash values, which may be taken by the insured if the policy is surrendered or which may be borrowed against. Some policies, such as annuities and endowment policies, are financial instruments to accumulate or liquidate wealth when it is needed.

In many countries, such as the United States and the UK, the tax law provides that the interest on this cash value is not taxable under certain circumstances. This leads to widespread use of life insurance as a tax-efficient method of saving as well as protection in the event of early death.

In the United States, the tax on interest income on life insurance policies and annuities is generally deferred. However, in some cases the benefit derived from tax deferral may be offset by a low return. This depends upon the insuring company, the type of policy and other variables (mortality, market return, etc.). Moreover, other income tax saving vehicles (e.g., IRAs, 401(k) plans, Roth IRAs) may be better alternatives for value accumulation.

§Burial insurance[edit]
Burial insurance is a very old type of life insurance which is paid out upon death to cover final expenses, such as the cost of a funeral. The Greeks and Romans introduced burial insurance c. 600 CE when they organized guilds called "benevolent societies" which cared for the surviving families and paid funeral expenses of members upon death. Guilds in the Middle Ages served a similar purpose, as did friendly societies during Victorian times.

§Property[edit]
Main article: Property insurance

This tornado damage to an Illinois home would be considered an "Act of God" for insurance purposes
Property insurance provides protection against risks to property, such as fire, theft or weather damage. This may include specialized forms of insurance such as fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake insurance, home insurance, inland marine insurance or boiler insurance. The term property insurance may, like casualty insurance, be used as a broad category of various subtypes of insurance, some of which are listed below:


US Airways Flight 1549 was written off after ditching into the Hudson River
Aviation insurance protects aircraft hulls and spares, and associated liability risks, such as passenger and third-party liability. Airports may also appear under this subcategory, including air traffic control and refuelling operations for international airports through to smaller domestic exposures.
Boiler insurance (also known as boiler and machinery insurance, or equipment breakdown insurance) insures against accidental physical damage to boilers, equipment or machinery.
Builder's risk insurance insures against the risk of physical loss or damage to property during construction. Builder's risk insurance is typically written on an "all risk" basis covering damage arising from any cause (including the negligence of the insured) not otherwise expressly excluded. Builder's risk insurance is coverage that protects a person's or organization's insurable interest in materials, fixtures and/or equipment being used in the construction or renovation of a building or structure should those items sustain physical loss or damage from an insured peril.[29]
Crop insurance may be purchased by farmers to reduce or manage various risks associated with growing crops. Such risks include crop loss or damage caused by weather, hail, drought, frost damage, insects, or disease.[30]
Earthquake insurance is a form of property insurance that pays the policyholder in the event of an earthquake that causes damage to the property. Most ordinary home insurance policies do not cover earthquake damage. Earthquake insurance policies generally feature a high deductible. Rates depend on location and hence the likelihood of an earthquake, as well as the construction of the home.
Fidelity bond is a form of casualty insurance that covers policyholders for losses incurred as a result of fraudulent acts by specified individuals. It usually insures a business for losses caused by the dishonest acts of its employees.

Hurricane Katrina caused over $80 billion of storm and flood damage
Flood insurance protects against property loss due to flooding. Many U.S. insurers do not provide flood insurance in some parts of the country. In response to this, the federal government created the National Flood Insurance Program which serves as the insurer of last resort.
Home insurance, also commonly called hazard insurance or homeowners insurance (often abbreviated in the real estate industry as HOI), provides coverage for damage or destruction of the policyholder's home. In some geographical areas, the policy may exclude certain types of risks, such as flood or earthquake, that require additional coverage. Maintenance-related issues are typically the homeowner's responsibility. The policy may include inventory, or this can be bought as a separate policy, especially for people who rent housing. In some countries, insurers offer a package which may include liability and legal responsibility for injuries and property damage caused by members of the household, including pets.[31]
Landlord insurance covers residential and commercial properties which are rented to others. Most homeowners' insurance covers only owner-occupied homes.
Marine insurance and marine cargo insurance cover the loss or damage of vessels at sea or on inland waterways, and of cargo in transit, regardless of the method of transit. When the owner of the cargo and the carrier are separate corporations, marine cargo insurance typically compensates the owner of cargo for losses sustained from fire, shipwreck, etc., but excludes losses that can be recovered from the carrier or the carrier's insurance. Many marine insurance underwriters will include "time element" coverage in such policies, which extends the indemnity to cover loss of profit and other business expenses attributable to the delay caused by a covered loss.
Supplemental natural disaster insurance covers specified expenses after a natural disaster renders the policyholder's home uninhabitable. Periodic payments are made directly to the insured until the home is rebuilt or a specified time period has elapsed.
Surety bond insurance is a three-party insurance guaranteeing the performance of the principal.

The demand for terrorism insurance surged after 9/11
Terrorism insurance provides protection against any loss or damage caused by terrorist activities. In the United States in the wake of 9/11, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act 2002 (TRIA) set up a federal program providing a transparent system of shared public and private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts of terrorism. The program was extended until the end of 2014 by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act 2007 (TRIPRA).
Volcano insurance is a specialized insurance protecting against damage arising specifically from volcanic eruptions.
Windstorm insurance is an insurance covering the damage that can be caused by wind events such as hurricanes.
§Liability[edit]
Main article: Liability insurance
Liability insurance is a very broad superset that covers legal claims against the insured. Many types of insurance include an aspect of liability coverage. For example, a homeowner's insurance policy will normally include liability coverage which protects the insured in the event of a claim brought by someone who slips and falls on the property; automobile insurance also includes an aspect of liability insurance that indemnifies against the harm that a crashing car can cause to others' lives, health, or property. The protection offered by a liability insurance policy is twofold: a legal defense in the event of a lawsuit commenced against the policyholder and indemnification (payment on behalf of the insured) with respect to a settlement or court verdict. Liability policies typically cover only the negligence of the insured, and will not apply to results of wilful or intentional acts by the insured.


The subprime mortgage crisis was the source of many liability insurance losses
Public liability insurance covers a business or organization against claims should its operations injure a member of the public or damage their property in some way.
Directors and officers liability insurance (D&O) protects an organization (usually a corporation) from costs associated with litigation resulting from errors made by directors and officers for which they are liable.
Environmental liability insurance protects the insured from bodily injury, property damage and cleanup costs as a result of the dispersal, release or escape of pollutants.
Errors and omissions insurance (E&O) is business liability insurance for professionals such as insurance agents, real estate agents and brokers, architects, third-party administrators (TPAs) and other business professionals.
Prize indemnity insurance protects the insured from giving away a large prize at a specific event. Examples would include offering prizes to contestants who can make a half-court shot at a basketball game, or a hole-in-one at a golf tournament.
Professional liability insurance, also called professional indemnity insurance (PI), protects insured professionals such as architectural corporations and medical practitioners against potential negligence claims made by their patients/clients. Professional liability insurance may take on different names depending on the profession. For example, professional liability insurance in reference to the medical profession may be called medical malpractice insurance.
§Credit[edit]
Main article: Payment protection insurance
Credit insurance repays some or all of a loan when certain circumstances arise to the borrower such as unemployment, disability, or death.

Mortgage insurance insures the lender against default by the borrower. Mortgage insurance is a form of credit insurance, although the name "credit insurance" more often is used to refer to policies that cover other kinds of debt.
Many credit cards offer payment protection plans which are a form of credit insurance.
Trade credit insurance is business insurance over the accounts receivable of the insured. The policy pays the policy holder for covered accounts receivable if the debtor defaults on payment.
§Other types[edit]
All-risk insurance is an insurance that covers a wide range of incidents and perils, except those noted in the policy. All-risk insurance is different from peril-specific insurance that cover losses from only those perils listed in the policy.[32] In car insurance, all-risk policy includes also the damages caused by the own driver.

High-value horses may be insured under a bloodstock policy
Bloodstock insurance covers individual horses or a number of horses under common ownership. Coverage is typically for mortality as a result of accident, illness or disease but may extend to include infertility, in-transit loss, veterinary fees, and prospective foal.
Business interruption insurance covers the loss of income, and the expenses incurred, after a covered peril interrupts normal business operations.
Collateral protection insurance (CPI) insures property (primarily vehicles) held as collateral for loans made by lending institutions.
Defense Base Act (DBA) insurance provides coverage for civilian workers hired by the government to perform contracts outside the United States and Canada. DBA is required for all U.S. citizens, U.S. residents, U.S. Green Card holders, and all employees or subcontractors hired on overseas government contracts. Depending on the country, foreign nationals must also be covered under DBA. This coverage typically includes expenses related to medical treatment and loss of wages, as well as disability and death benefits.
Expatriate insurance provides individuals and organizations operating outside of their home country with protection for automobiles, property, health, liability and business pursuits.
Kidnap and ransom insurance is designed to protect individuals and corporations operating in high-risk areas around the world against the perils of kidnap, extortion, wrongful detention and hijacking.
Legal expenses insurance covers policyholders for the potential costs of legal action against an institution or an individual. When something happens which triggers the need for legal action, it is known as "the event". There are two main types of legal expenses insurance: before the event insurance and after the event insurance.
Livestock insurance is a specialist policy provided to, for example, commercial or hobby farms, aquariums, fish farms or any other animal holding. Cover is available for mortality or economic slaughter as a result of accident, illness or disease but can extend to include destruction by government order.
Media liability insurance is designed to cover professionals that engage in film and television production and print, against risks such as defamation.
Nuclear incident insurance covers damages resulting from an incident involving radioactive materials and is generally arranged at the national level. (See the nuclear exclusion clause and for the US the Price-Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act.)
Pet insurance insures pets against accidents and illnesses; some companies cover routine/wellness care and burial, as well.
Pollution insurance usually takes the form of first-party coverage for contamination of insured property either by external or on-site sources. Coverage is also afforded for liability to third parties arising from contamination of air, water, or land due to the sudden and accidental release of hazardous materials from the insured site. The policy usually covers the costs of cleanup and may include coverage for releases from underground storage tanks. Intentional acts are specifically excluded.
Purchase insurance is aimed at providing protection on the products people purchase. Purchase insurance can cover individual purchase protection, warranties, guarantees, care plans and even mobile phone insurance. Such insurance is normally very limited in the scope of problems that are covered by the policy.
Title insurance provides a guarantee that title to real property is vested in the purchaser and/or mortgagee, free and clear of liens or encumbrances. It is usually issued in conjunction with a search of the public records performed at the time of a real estate transaction.
Travel insurance is an insurance cover taken by those who travel abroad, which covers certain losses such as medical expenses, loss of personal belongings, travel delay, and personal liabilities.
Tuition insurance insures students against involuntary withdrawal from cost-intensive educational institutions
Interest rate insurance protects the holder from adverse changes in interest rates, for instance for those with a variable rate loan or mortgage
Divorce insurance is a form of contractual liability insurance that pays the insured a cash benefit if their marriage ends in divorce.
§Insurance financing vehicles[edit]
Fraternal insurance is provided on a cooperative basis by fraternal benefit societies or other social organizations.[33]
No-fault insurance is a type of insurance policy (typically automobile insurance) where insureds are indemnified by their own insurer regardless of fault in the incident.
Protected self-insurance is an alternative risk financing mechanism in which an organization retains the mathematically calculated cost of risk within the organization and transfers the catastrophic risk with specific and aggregate limits to an insurer so the maximum total cost of the program is known. A properly designed and underwritten Protected Self-Insurance Program reduces and stabilizes the cost of insurance and provides valuable risk management information.
Retrospectively rated insurance is a method of establishing a premium on large commercial accounts. The final premium is based on the insured's actual loss experience during the policy term, sometimes subject to a minimum and maximum premium, with the final premium determined by a formula. Under this plan, the current year's premium is based partially (or wholly) on the current year's losses, although the premium adjustments may take months or years beyond the current year's expiration date. The rating formula is guaranteed in the insurance contract. Formula: retrospective premium = converted loss + basic premium × tax multiplier. Numerous variations of this formula have been developed and are in use.
Formal self-insurance is the deliberate decision to pay for otherwise insurable losses out of one's own money.[citation needed] This can be done on a formal basis by establishing a separate fund into which funds are deposited on a periodic basis, or by simply forgoing the purchase of available insurance and paying out-of-pocket. Self-insurance is usually used to pay for high-frequency, low-severity losses. Such losses, if covered by conventional insurance, mean having to pay a premium that includes loadings for the company's general expenses, cost of putting the policy on the books, acquisition expenses, premium taxes, and contingencies. While this is true for all insurance, for small, frequent losses the transaction costs may exceed the benefit of volatility reduction that insurance otherwise affords.[citation needed]
Reinsurance is a type of insurance purchased by insurance companies or self-insured employers to protect against unexpected losses. Financial reinsurance is a form of reinsurance that is primarily used for capital management rather than to transfer insurance risk.
Social insurance can be many things to many people in many countries. But a summary of its essence is that it is a collection of insurance coverages (including components of life insurance, disability income insurance, unemployment insurance, health insurance, and others), plus retirement savings, that requires participation by all citizens. By forcing everyone in society to be a policyholder and pay premiums, it ensures that everyone can become a claimant when or if he/she needs to. Along the way this inevitably becomes related to other concepts such as the justice system and the welfare state. This is a large, complicated topic that engenders tremendous debate, which can be further studied in the following articles (and others):
National Insurance
Social safety net
Social security
Social Security debate (United States)
Social Security (United States)
Social welfare provision
Stop-loss insurance provides protection against catastrophic or unpredictable losses. It is purchased by organizations who do not want to assume 100% of the liability for losses arising from the plans. Under a stop-loss policy, the insurance company becomes liable for losses that exceed certain limits called deductibles.
§Closed community self-insurance[edit]
Some communities prefer to create virtual insurance amongst themselves by other means than contractual risk transfer, which assigns explicit numerical values to risk. A number of religious groups, including the Amish and some Muslim groups, depend on support provided by their communities when disasters strike. The risk presented by any given person is assumed collectively by the community who all bear the cost of rebuilding lost property and supporting people whose needs are suddenly greater after a loss of some kind. In supportive communities where others can be trusted to follow community leaders, this tacit form of insurance can work. In this manner the community can even out the extreme differences in insurability that exist among its members. Some further justification is also provided by invoking the moral hazard of explicit insurance contracts.

In the United Kingdom, The Crown (which, for practical purposes, meant the civil service) did not insure property such as government buildings. If a government building was damaged, the cost of repair would be met from public funds because, in the long run, this was cheaper than paying insurance premiums. Since many UK government buildings have been sold to property companies, and rented back, this arrangement is now less common and may have disappeared altogether.

§Insurance companies[edit]

Certificate issued by Republic Fire Insurance Co. of New York c. 1860
Insurance companies may be classified into two groups:

Life insurance companies, which sell life insurance, annuities and pensions products.
Non-life or property/casualty insurance companies, which sell other types of insurance.
General insurance companies can be further divided into these sub categories.

Standard lines
Excess lines
In most countries, life and non-life insurers are subject to different regulatory regimes and different tax and accounting rules. The main reason for the distinction between the two types of company is that life, annuity, and pension business is very long-term in nature – coverage for life assurance or a pension can cover risks over many decades. By contrast, non-life insurance cover usually covers a shorter period, such as one year.

In the United States, standard line insurance companies are insurers that have received a license or authorization from a state for the purpose of writing specific kinds of insurance in that state, such as automobile insurance or homeowners' insurance.[34] They are typically referred to as "admitted" insurers. Generally, such an insurance company must submit its rates and policy forms to the state's insurance regulator to receive his or her prior approval, although whether an insurance company must receive prior approval depends upon the kind of insurance being written. Standard line insurance companies usually charge lower premiums than excess line insurers and may sell directly to individual insureds. They are regulated by state laws, which include restrictions on rates and forms, and which aim to protect consumers and the public from unfair or abusive practices.[34] These insurers also are required to contribute to state guarantee funds, which are used to pay for losses if an insurer becomes insolvent.[34]


The subscription room at Lloyd's of London in the early 19th century.
Excess line insurance companies (also known as Excess and Surplus) typically insure risks not covered by the standard lines insurance market, due to a variety of reasons (e.g., new entity or an entity that does not have an adequate loss history, an entity with unique risk characteristics, or an entity that has a loss history that does not fit the underwriting requirements of the standard lines insurance market).[34] They are typically referred to as non-admitted or unlicensed insurers.[34] Non-admitted insurers are generally not licensed or authorized in the states in which they write business, although they must be licensed or authorized in the state in which they are domiciled.[34] These companies have more flexibility and can react faster than standard line insurance companies because they are not required to file rates and forms.[34] However, they still have substantial regulatory requirements placed upon them.

Most states require that excess line insurers submit financial information, articles of incorporation, a list of officers, and other general information.[34] They also may not write insurance that is typically available in the admitted market, do not participate in state guarantee funds (and therefore policyholders do not have any recourse through these funds if an insurer becomes insolvent and cannot pay claims), may pay higher taxes, only may write coverage for a risk if it has been rejected by three different admitted insurers, and only when the insurance producer placing the business has a surplus lines license.[34] Generally, when an excess line insurer writes a policy, it must, pursuant to state laws, provide disclosure to the policyholder that the policyholder's policy is being written by an excess line insurer.[34]

On July 21, 2010, President Barack Obama signed into law the Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act of 2010 ("NRRA"), which took effect on July 21, 2011, and was part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The NRRA changed the regulatory paradigm for excess line insurance. Generally, under the NRRA, only the insured's home state may regulate and tax the excess line transaction.[35]

Insurance companies are generally classified as either mutual or proprietary companies.[36] Mutual companies are owned by the policyholders, while shareholders (who may or may not own policies) own proprietary insurance companies.

Demutualization of mutual insurers to form stock companies, as well as the formation of a hybrid known as a mutual holding company, became common in some countries, such as the United States, in the late 20th century. However, not all states permit mutual holding companies.

Other possible forms for an insurance company include reciprocals, in which policyholders reciprocate in sharing risks, and Lloyd's organizations.

Insurance companies are rated by various agencies such as A. M. Best. The ratings include the company's financial strength, which measures its ability to pay claims. It also rates financial instruments issued by the insurance company, such as bonds, notes, and securitization products.

Reinsurance companies are insurance companies that sell policies to other insurance companies, allowing them to reduce their risks and protect themselves from very large losses. The reinsurance market is dominated by a few very large companies, with huge reserves. A reinsurer may also be a direct writer of insurance risks as well.

Captive insurance companies may be defined as limited-purpose insurance companies established with the specific objective of financing risks emanating from their parent group or groups. This definition can sometimes be extended to include some of the risks of the parent company's customers. In short, it is an in-house self-insurance vehicle. Captives may take the form of a "pure" entity (which is a 100% subsidiary of the self-insured parent company); of a "mutual" captive (which insures the collective risks of members of an industry); and of an "association" captive (which self-insures individual risks of the members of a professional, commercial or industrial association). Captives represent commercial, economic and tax advantages to their sponsors because of the reductions in costs they help create and for the ease of insurance risk management and the flexibility for cash flows they generate. Additionally, they may provide coverage of risks which is neither available nor offered in the traditional insurance market at reasonable prices.

The types of risk that a captive can underwrite for their parents include property damage, public and product liability, professional indemnity, employee benefits, employers' liability, motor and medical aid expenses. The captive's exposure to such risks may be limited by the use of reinsurance.

Captives are becoming an increasingly important component of the risk management and risk financing strategy of their parent. This can be understood against the following background:

Heavy and increasing premium costs in almost every line of coverage
Difficulties in insuring certain types of fortuitous risk
Differential coverage standards in various parts of the world
Rating structures which reflect market trends rather than individual loss experience
Insufficient credit for deductibles and/or loss control efforts
There are also companies known as "insurance consultants". Like a mortgage broker, these companies are paid a fee by the customer to shop around for the best insurance policy amongst many companies. Similar to an insurance consultant, an 'insurance broker' also shops around for the best insurance policy amongst many companies. However, with insurance brokers, the fee is usually paid in the form of commission from the insurer that is selected rather than directly from the client.

Neither insurance consultants nor insurance brokers are insurance companies and no risks are transferred to them in insurance transactions. Third party administrators are companies that perform underwriting and sometimes claims handling services for insurance companies. These companies often have special expertise that the insurance companies do not have.

The financial stability and strength of an insurance company should be a major consideration when buying an insurance contract. An insurance premium paid currently provides coverage for losses that might arise many years in the future. For that reason, the viability of the insurance carrier is very important. In recent years, a number of insurance companies have become insolvent, leaving their policyholders with no coverage (or coverage only from a government-backed insurance pool or other arrangement with less attractive payouts for losses). A number of independent rating agencies provide information and rate the financial viability of insurance companies.

§Across the world[edit]

Life insurance premiums written in 2005

Non-life insurance premiums written in 2005
Global insurance premiums grew by 2.7% in inflation-adjusted terms in 2010 to $4.3 trillion, climbing above pre-crisis levels. The return to growth and record premiums generated during the year followed two years of decline in real terms. Life insurance premiums increased by 3.2% in 2010 and non-life premiums by 2.1%. While industrialised countries saw an increase in premiums of around 1.4%, insurance markets in emerging economies saw rapid expansion with 11% growth in premium income. The global insurance industry was sufficiently capitalised to withstand the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009 and most insurance companies restored their capital to pre-crisis levels by the end of 2010. With the continuation of the gradual recovery of the global economy, it is likely the insurance industry will continue to see growth in premium income both in industrialised countries and emerging markets in 2011.

Advanced economies account for the bulk of global insurance. With premium income of $1.62 trillion, Europe was the most important region in 2010, followed by North America $1.409 trillion and Asia $1.161 trillion. Europe has however seen a decline in premium income during the year in contrast to the growth seen in North America and Asia. The top four countries generated more than a half of premiums. The United States and Japan alone accounted for 40% of world insurance, much higher than their 7% share of the global population. Emerging economies accounted for over 85% of the world's population but only around 15% of premiums. Their markets are however growing at a quicker pace.[37] The country expected to have the biggest impact on the insurance share distribution across the world is China. According to Sam Radwan of ENHANCE International LLC, low premium penetration (insurance premium as a % of GDP), an ageing population and the largest car market in terms of new sales, premium growth has averaged 15–20% in the past five years, and China is expected to be the largest insurance market in the next decade or two.[38]

§Regulatory differences[edit]
Main article: Insurance law
In the United States, insurance is regulated by the states under the McCarran-Ferguson Act, with "periodic proposals for federal intervention", and a nonprofit coalition of state insurance agencies called the National Association of Insurance Commissioners works to harmonize the country's different laws and regulations.[39] The National Conference of Insurance Legislators (NCOIL) also works to harmonize the different state laws.[40]

In the European Union, the Third Non-Life Directive and the Third Life Directive, both passed in 1992 and effective 1994, created a single insurance market in Europe and allowed insurance companies to offer insurance anywhere in the EU (subject to permission from authority in the head office) and allowed insurance consumers to purchase insurance from any insurer in the EU.[41] As far as insurance in the United Kingdom, the Financial Services Authority took over insurance regulation from the General Insurance Standards Council in 2005;[42] laws passed include the Insurance Companies Act 1973 and another in 1982,[43] and reforms to warranty and other aspects under discussion as of 2012.[44]

The insurance industry in China was nationalized in 1949 and thereafter offered by only a single state-owned company, the People's Insurance Company of China, which was eventually suspended as demand declined in a communist environment. In 1978, market reforms led to an increase in the market and by 1995 a comprehensive Insurance Law of the People's Republic of China[45] was passed, followed in 1998 by the formation of China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC), which has broad regulatory authority over the insurance market of China.[46]

In India IRDA is insurance regulatory authority. As per the section 4 of IRDA Act 1999, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA), which was constituted by an act of parliament. National Insurance Academy, Pune is apex insurance capacity builder institute promoted with support from Ministry of Finance and by LIC, Life & General Insurance companies.

§Controversies[edit]
§Insurance insulates too much[edit]
An insurance company may inadvertently find that its insureds may not be as risk-averse as they might otherwise be (since, by definition, the insured has transferred the risk to the insurer), a concept known as moral hazard. To reduce their own financial exposure, insurance companies have contractual clauses that mitigate their obligation to provide coverage if the insured engages in behavior that grossly magnifies their risk of loss or liability.[citation needed]

For example, life insurance companies may require higher premiums or deny coverage altogether to people who work in hazardous occupations or engage in dangerous sports. Liability insurance providers do not provide coverage for liability arising from intentional torts committed by or at the direction of the insured. Even if a provider desired to provide such coverage, it is against the public policy of most countries to allow such insurance to exist, and thus it is usually illegal.[citation needed]

§Complexity of insurance policy contracts[edit]

9/11 was a major insurance loss, but there were disputes over the World Trade Center's insurance policy
Insurance policies can be complex and some policyholders may not understand all the fees and coverages included in a policy. As a result, people may buy policies on unfavorable terms. In response to these issues, many countries have enacted detailed statutory and regulatory regimes governing every aspect of the insurance business, including minimum standards for policies and the ways in which they may be advertised and sold.

For example, most insurance policies in the English language today have been carefully drafted in plain English; the industry learned the hard way that many courts will not enforce policies against insureds when the judges themselves cannot understand what the policies are saying. Typically, courts construe ambiguities in insurance policies against the insurance company and in favor of coverage under the policy.

Many institutional insurance purchasers buy insurance through an insurance broker. While on the surface it appears the broker represents the buyer (not the insurance company), and typically counsels the buyer on appropriate coverage and policy limitations, in the vast majority of cases a broker's compensation comes in the form of a commission as a percentage of the insurance premium, creating a conflict of interest in that the broker's financial interest is tilted towards encouraging an insured to purchase more insurance than might be necessary at a higher price. A broker generally holds contracts with many insurers, thereby allowing the broker to "shop" the market for the best rates and coverage possible.

Insurance may also be purchased through an agent. A tied agent, working exclusively with one insurer, represents the insurance company from whom the policyholder buys (while a free agent sales policies of various insurance companies). Just as there is a potential conflict of interest with a broker, an agent has a different type of conflict. Because agents work directly for the insurance company, if there is a claim the agent may advise the client to the benefit of the insurance company. Agents generally cannot offer as broad a range of selection compared to an insurance broker.

An independent insurance consultant advises insureds on a fee-for-service retainer, similar to an attorney, and thus offers completely independent advice, free of the financial conflict of interest of brokers and/or agents. However, such a consultant must still work through brokers and/or agents in order to secure coverage for their clients.

§Limited consumer benefits[edit]
In United States, economists and consumer advocates generally consider insurance to be worthwhile for low-probability, catastrophic losses, but not for high-probability, small losses. Because of this, consumers are advised to select high deductibles and to not insure losses which would not cause a disruption in their life. However, consumers have shown a tendency to prefer low deductibles and to prefer to insure relatively high-probability, small losses over low-probability, perhaps due to not understanding or ignoring the low-probability risk. This is associated with reduced purchasing of insurance against low-probability losses, and may result in increased inefficiencies from moral hazard.[47]

§Redlining[edit]
Redlining is the practice of denying insurance coverage in specific geographic areas, supposedly because of a high likelihood of loss, while the alleged motivation is unlawful discrimination. Racial profiling or redlining has a long history in the property insurance industry in the United States. From a review of industry underwriting and marketing materials, court documents, and research by government agencies, industry and community groups, and academics, it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry.[48]

In July 2007, The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) released a report presenting the results of a study concerning credit-based insurance scores in automobile insurance. The study found that these scores are effective predictors of risk. It also showed that African-Americans and Hispanics are substantially overrepresented in the lowest credit scores, and substantially underrepresented in the highest, while Caucasians and Asians are more evenly spread across the scores. The credit scores were also found to predict risk within each of the ethnic groups, leading the FTC to conclude that the scoring models are not solely proxies for redlining. The FTC indicated little data was available to evaluate benefit of insurance scores to consumers.[49] The report was disputed by representatives of the Consumer Federation of America, the National Fair Housing Alliance, the National Consumer Law Center, and the Center for Economic Justice, for relying on data provided by the insurance industry.[50]

All states have provisions in their rate regulation laws or in their fair trade practice acts that prohibit unfair discrimination, often called redlining, in setting rates and making insurance available.[51]

In determining premiums and premium rate structures, insurers consider quantifiable factors, including location, credit scores, gender, occupation, marital status, and education level. However, the use of such factors is often considered to be unfair or unlawfully discriminatory, and the reaction against this practice has in some instances led to political disputes about the ways in which insurers determine premiums and regulatory intervention to limit the factors used.

An insurance underwriter's job is to evaluate a given risk as to the likelihood that a loss will occur. Any factor that causes a greater likelihood of loss should theoretically be charged a higher rate. This basic principle of insurance must be followed if insurance companies are to remain solvent.[citation needed] Thus, "discrimination" against (i.e., negative differential treatment of) potential insureds in the risk evaluation and premium-setting process is a necessary by-product of the fundamentals of insurance underwriting. For instance, insurers charge older people significantly higher premiums than they charge younger people for term life insurance. Older people are thus treated differently from younger people (i.e., a distinction is made, discrimination occurs). The rationale for the differential treatment goes to the heart of the risk a life insurer takes: Old people are likely to die sooner than young people, so the risk of loss (the insured's death) is greater in any given period of time and therefore the risk premium must be higher to cover the greater risk. However, treating insureds differently when there is no actuarially sound reason for doing so is unlawful discrimination.

§Insurance patents[edit]
Further information: Insurance patent
New assurance products can now be protected from copying with a business method patent in the United States.

A recent example of a new insurance product that is patented is Usage Based auto insurance. Early versions were independently invented and patented by a major US auto insurance company, Progressive Auto Insurance (U.S. Patent 5,797,134) and a Spanish independent inventor, Salvador Minguijon Perez (EP 0700009).

Many independent inventors are in favor of patenting new insurance products since it gives them protection from big companies when they bring their new insurance products to market. Independent inventors account for 70% of the new U.S. patent applications in this area.

Many insurance executives are opposed to patenting insurance products because it creates a new risk for them. The Hartford insurance company, for example, recently had to pay $80 million to an independent inventor, Bancorp Services, in order to settle a patent infringement and theft of trade secret lawsuit for a type of corporate owned life insurance product invented and patented by Bancorp.

There are currently about 150 new patent applications on insurance inventions filed per year in the United States. The rate at which patents have been issued has steadily risen from 15 in 2002 to 44 in 2006.[52]

Inventors can now have their insurance US patent applications reviewed by the public in the Peer to Patent program.[53] The first insurance patent application to be posted was US2009005522 "risk assessment company". It was posted on March 6, 2009. This patent application describes a method for increasing the ease of changing insurance companies.[54]

§The insurance industry and rent-seeking[edit]
Certain insurance products and practices have been described as rent-seeking by critics.[citation needed] That is, some insurance products or practices are useful primarily because of legal benefits, such as reducing taxes, as opposed to providing protection against risks of adverse events. Under United States tax law, for example, most owners of variable annuities and variable life insurance can invest their premium payments in the stock market and defer or eliminate paying any taxes on their investments until withdrawals are made. Sometimes this tax deferral is the only reason people use these products.[citation needed] Another example is the legal infrastructure which allows life insurance to be held in an irrevocable trust which is used to pay an estate tax while the proceeds themselves are immune from the estate tax.

§Religious concerns[edit]
Muslim scholars have varying opinions about life insurance. Life insurance policies that earn interest (or guaranteed bonus/NAV) are generally considered to be a form of riba[55] (usury) and some consider even policies that do not earn interest to be a form of gharar (speculation). Some argue that gharar is not present due to the actuarial science behind the underwriting.[56]

Jewish rabbinical scholars also have expressed reservations regarding insurance as an avoidance of God's will but most find it acceptable in moderation.[57]

Some Christians believe insurance represents a lack of faith[citation needed] and there is a long history of resistance to commercial insurance in Anabaptist communities (Mennonites, Amish, Hutterites, Brethren in Christ) but many participate in community-based self-insurance programs that spread risk within their communities.
DEFINITION OF 'PREMIUM'
1. The total cost of an option. 

2. The difference between the higher price paid for a fixed-income security and the security's face amount at issue.

3. The specified amount of payment required periodically by an insurer to provide coverage under a given insurance plan for a defined period of time. The premium is paid by the insured party to the insurer, and primarily compensates the insurer for bearing the risk of a payout should the insurance agreement's coverage be required.

INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'PREMIUM'
1. The premium of an option is basically the sum of the option's intrinsic and time value. It is important to note that volatility also affects the premium. 

2. If a fixed-income security (bond) is purchased at a premium, existing interest rates are lower than the coupon rate. Investors pay a premium for an investment that will return an amount greater than existing interest rates.

3. A common example of an insurance premium comes from auto insurance. A vehicle owner can insure the value of his or her vehicle against loss resulting from accident, theft and other potential problems. The owner usually pays a fixed premium amount in exchange for the insurance company's guarantee to cover any economic losses incurred under the scope of the agreement.
Financial cost of obtaining an insurance cover, paid as a lump sum or in installments during the duration of the policy. A failure to pay premium when due automatically cancels the insurance policy which, upon payment of the outstanding amount within a certain period, may be restored.

As of 1 January 2013 a new type of surtax was introduced to be levied on the insurance sector, the payment of which, however, exempts an insurer from the establishment of the surtax on financial institutions and the establishment of fire prevention contributions. The new tax type is the insurance tax, the rules of which are provided by the Act CII of 2012 on Insurance Tax (Act IT). The revenues generated from the tax will go to the central budget.

1. The object of the tax obligation, the tax subject 

The provision of insurance services – comprehensive insurance, property and accident insurances – is subject to taxation if the risk is situated in Hungary 1 (Section 2 of Act IT).

No insurance tax is due on compulsory motor vehicle liability insurance, health insurance 2, or agricultural insurance 3.
Comprehensive insurance
Property and accident insurances
Comprehensive insurance on road vehicles
(covering damages of road vehicles, other engine driven land vehicles, construction machinery, non-engine driven land vehicles)
Accident insurance
(including workplace accidents and employment-related illnesses)
Comprehensive insurance of railway track vehicles
(covering damages of railway track vehicles)
Cargo insurance
(including goods, articles of luggage and any other items of property) 4
Aircraft liability insurance
(damages of aircraft)
Insurance against fire and natural disasters
(all property damage caused by fire, explosion, thunderstorm, other natural disasters besides thunderstorm, nuclear energy, ground subsidence, earthquakes)
Comprehensive insurance of marine, lacustrine and river vehicles
(damages in marine, lacustrine and river vehicles)
Other property damage 5
 	
Liability insurance of self-propelled land vehicles 6 (including the carrier’s liability)
 	
Aircraft liability insurance
(including the carrier’s liability)
 	
Marine, lacustrine and river vehicle liability insurance
(including the carrier’s liability)
 	
General liability 7
 	
Credit insurance
(includes: general insolvency, export loans, payment instalment transactions, mortgage loans, agricultural loans)
 	
Sureties and guarantees
 	
Insurance against various financial losses 8
 	
Legal protection insurance 9
 	
Assistance
 	
Funeral insurance
The risk is situated

·        in the country where the real-estate(s) are located in the case of insuring real-estate(s) and the moveable property in them if they are covered by the same insurance policy,

·        in the country established as the country of commitment in the Act on Insurance Against Civil Liability in Respect of the Use of Motor Vehicles 10 in the case of any vehicle insurance,

·        in the country where the contract was concluded by the contracting parties irrespective of the insurance sector in the case of travel and vacation risk insurances of at most 4 months,

·        in the country where the permanent residence of the contracting party is located (or if the contracting party is a legal person, the site of this legal person which the contract applies to) in any other cases not referred to specifically in the previous points.

The subject of the tax is the insurer (insurance company), including the Hungarian branch offices of third country insurers seated in a Member State of the European Economic Area or in a third country defined by Act IB, and also including cross-border insurance  service providers (Section 3 Act IT).

2. Tax base and tax rate 11, the accounting of insurance premium

The base of tax is the insurance premium (Point 7 of Section 1 of Act IT).

This includes the gross fee charged by an insurance company for the insurance services provided, and shown in the records according to accounting regulations, including the sums not shown as gross premium according to accounting regulations, which, however, are treated as cover for insurance services in consideration for insurance services. 12The tax base does not include the gross premium charged for agricultural insurance, and the premium income received from other insurance companies for reinsurance acceptances 13 - shown as gross premium income.

If the insurance company provides more than one insurance services within the framework of a single insurance relationship, or provides a taxable insurance service together with another insurance service, the premium means the premium charged separately for each taxable insurance service.

Insurers prepare their accounting of insurance premium in accordance with Annex 2 of the Government Resolution No. 192/2000 (XI. 24.) on the Details of the Annual Reporting and Accounting Obligations. The significance of that is that the tax is established by the 20th of the month following the accounting of the insurance premium (or premium instalment). Regarding the accounting of the premium the insurer has two options to choose from:

a) the insurance premium income is continuously accounted on their due date defined in the effective insurance contracts and with the expected amount on the basis of the contract. If a contract becomes no longer effective, the income already accounted in the month of termination will be reduced with respect to the date of termination of the contract;

b) the insurance premium income is accounted on the date of its financial realization in the course of the insurance year. When the year is closed the insurer accounts the income financially unrealized but due until the balance sheet day; at the same time, it terminates the income accounted under the same title when the previous year was closed.

Example:

The insurer follows Point a) when it accounts insurances.

The client contracted for property insurance against fire and natural disasters with the insurer and the insured period lasts from 1 January 2014 until 31 December 2014. The client chose to pay premium on a year-quarterly basis, and duly complies with their payment obligations regarding the first two year-quarters on 22 January and 6 May of 2014. On 17 May the client terminates the contract.

In accordance with the provisions of the contract with the insurer the contract becomes ineffective on the day of the unilateral termination in such cases.

The insurer accounts for the premium incomes as income realized for January and April 2014 (regardless of the fact that the frequency of premium payment was set in year-quarters in this case). In the month of the termination of the contract in May 2014, the accounted income for the second year-quarter is reduced by the amount due for the period between 18 May and 30 June.

The following chart summarizes the tax rates of various tax bases valid in 2013.

Type of insurance
Tax base
Tax rates
Comprehensive
insurance
premium
- 15 per cent of the tax base
 - for those tax subjects whose comprehensive tax base 14 in the calendar year immediately preceding the month of tax accounting was less than 8 billion HUF, the tax rate for the month of accounting is
1.) 3.75 per cent of the part of the tax base not exceeding 100 million HUF
(the 25 per cent of the 15 per cent)
2.) 7.5 per cent for the part of the tax base that exceeds 100 million HUF but is less than 700 million HUF (the 50 per cent of the 15 per cent)
3.) 7.5 per cent for the part of the tax base that exceeds 700 million HUF
Property and accident insurance
premium
- 10 per cent of the tax base
 - for those tax subjects whose comprehensive tax base in the calendar year immediately preceding the month of tax accounting was less than 8 billion HUF, the tax rate for the month of accounting is
1.) 2.5 per cent of the part of the tax base not exceeding 100 million HUF
(the 25 per cent of the 10 per cent)
2.) 5 per cent for the part of the tax base that exceeds 100 million HUF but is less than 700 million HUF (the 50 per cent of the 10 per cent)
3.) 10 per cent for the part of the tax base that exceeds 700 million HUF
When the tax base and tax rates are calculated the following must be highlighted:

1.) Establishing tax liabilities

For the establishment of tax liabilities what needs to be examined first is whether the consolidated tax base for the year immediately preceding the month of tax accounting – if the month of tax accounting is in 2013, then the insurance income generated in 2012 in terms of insurances defined in Act IT – reached 8 million HUF or not.

In case it did, the tax rate of comprehensive insurances is 15 per cent, and the tax rate of property and accident taxes is 10 per cent in the particular months of tax obligation.

In case it did not, the tax rate is

- 25 per cent of the 15 and 10 per cents of the tax base of the accounted month for the part of the tax base not reaching 100 million HUF,

-  50 per cent of the 15 and 10 per cents of the tax base of the accounted month for the part of the tax base exceeding 100 million HUF, but not exceeding 700 million HUF,

-   100 per cent of the 15 and 10 per cents of the tax base of the accounted month for the part of the tax base exceeding 700 million HUF.

The applicable tax rates depend on two factors: 1) the aggregate gross amount of income generated from comprehensive insurances and property and accident insurances, 2) the amount of the tax base in the month of tax accounting.

The favourable tax rates in the various tax brackets are used in the particular insurance sectors in a ratio in direct proportion to the shares of comprehensive insurances and property and accident insurances in the entire tax base of the particular month.

Example:

Suppose that the insurer’s consolidated tax base in the tax year of 2013 was 4 billion HUF.

The tax base in February 2014 is 570 million HUF out of which 360 million HUF was generated from comprehensive insurances and 210 million HUF was generated from property insurances.

Since the consolidated tax base was less than 8 billion HUF in the previous year, the favourable tax rates are applicable for the February tax base.

Since 12/19th part of the tax base was generated from comprehensive insurances and 7/19th part was generated from property insurances, the same proportions are applicable for the part of the tax rate which does not exceed 100 million HUF (therefore, 63.16 million HUF belongs to this tax bracket from comprehensive insurances, and 36.84 million HUF belongs here from property insurances).

The relevant amounts of taxes are therefore 2.37 million HUF (63.16 million HUF x 3.75%), and 0.92 HUF (36.84 million HUF x 2.5%); that is to say 3.29 HUF in total.

470 million HUF goes to the next tax bracket, out of which the share of comprehensive insurance is 296.84 million HUF (360 million HUF – 63.16 million HUF), and the share of property insurance is 173.16 million HUF (210 million – 36.84 million).

The amount of taxes in the middle bracket from comprehensive insurances is 22.26 million HUF (296.84 million HUF x 7.5%), and 8.66 million HUF from property insurances (173.16 million HUF x 5%) 8.66 million HUF.

The total amount of insurance taxes from the taxable premium fees in February 2014 is therefore 34.21 million HUF (3.29 million HUF + 22.26 million HUF + 8.66 million HUF).

3. Tax establishment 

Insurance companies shall assess the tax on all premium payments received during a month, by the 20th day of the following month – that is, until 20 February 2014 for the first time in 2014 –, and shall declare and pay it using the form 1420 prescribed by the state tax authority.15 Administrative tasks regarding insurance taxes are performed by the state tax authority.  
An insurance premium is the amount of money charged by a company for active coverage. The sum a person pays in premiums, also referred to as the rate, is determined by several factors, including age, health, and the area a person lives in. People pay these rates annually or in smaller payments over the course of the year, and the amount can change over time. When insurance premiums are not paid, the policy is typically considered void and companies will not honor claims against it.

What Premiums Cover

Generally, premiums cover whatever is detailed in the insurance policy, and the services provided or paid for depend entirely on the specific policy and type of protection. The following are the most common varieties and the basic services they often cover. Consumers should keep in mind that not all of these types of insurance are available or common in all countries, and there are many other kinds.

Life insurance typically pays a lump sum in the event of the policyholder's death to those detailed in the person’s will or the plan itself. It may pay for funeral arrangements, outstanding debt, living expenses for those left behind, or other expenses related to the deceased's estate.
Health insurance often pays for some portion of the expense of office visits, prescription medications, surgical procedures, mental health services, ongoing treatment, and/or emergency services. Not all of these services are always covered, however, and plans can vary widely. A person may have to pay out of pocket for certain services or for a percentage of the cost of services rendered.

Car insurance premiums usually cover damages to the policyholder's vehicle, any other vehicles in an accident, roadside help, and/or medical bills related to an accident. Motorcycle, boat, and other types of motorized vehicle coverage usually provide the same types of services.

Home owners' insurance, which is typically paid yearly or as a part of a combined escrow mortgage payment in some countries, usually covers damages to a home as well as its contents in the case of theft, fire, storms, and many other disasters. Renter's coverage is similar, although usually only pays for damage caused by the policyholder or damage to the policyholder's personal items.

How Rates are Calculated

The starting point for an insurance premium is largely based on statistics, though people's habits and history can cause the rate to be higher or lower. A 22-year-old male seeking coverage for a sports car can often anticipate higher premiums than a 45-year-old woman driving a mid-size sedan. Both may have excellent driving records, but the insurance company considers a younger driver in a faster car more at risk for accidents than it does an experienced driver in a slower vehicle; therefore, the insurance quotes will usually be noticeably different.

The same philosophy holds true for medical insurance premiums in countries where the government does not provide health care to its citizens. People with health problems or who engage in unhealthy activities and those in dangerous fields of work often pay significantly more for insurance than healthy individuals with safe jobs. For example, non-smokers statistically live healthier lives than smokers, and construction workers may have more serious on-the-job accidents than accountants. Therefore, a construction foreperson who smokes will typically pay much more in premiums than a non-smoking CPA.

Insurance rates also vary by area. When it comes to automobile coverage, companies that provide service in cities or regions that statistically show an above-normal accident rate will often charge more than companies in places where there are fewer accidents. For property insurance, the size and age of the property, how close it is to a flood zone, and the chances of bad weather are all considered, as is the amount of money a homeowner will need to replace his or her household goods, when a company is fixing rates.

The cost of a premium for the same service can vary widely among providers, which is why experts strongly recommend that consumers get several price quotes before committing to a policy. People should keep in mind that the lowest quoted price on a premium may be the better bargain, but the insurance policy may not provide much coverage.

What Causes Rates to Change

Insurance companies can raise premium rates for any number of reasons, but one of the most common is a high number of claims on the policy. An insurer typically bases its prices on how much it will end up paying over the life of the policy; ideally, it tries to pay out less than what the policyholder pays in. When a person regularly files claims against the insurance policy, the company has to pay out more, limiting its profit margin. As a result, it will often raise premiums to recover this cost.

In this same line, an insurer may raise rates if it expects an increase in claims. For example, if an otherwise healthy individual sustains permanent injuries in a car accident, her health insurance company may increase her premiums because it expects her healthcare costs to go up. Rates may also rise generally due to a price hike in services, to pay for claims from other policy holders, or to keep up with inflation.

For property insurance, whether homeowner or rental, instances where the property is rezoned into a flood zone, earthquake zone, or similar situations may cause rates to rise. Renting out a primary residence or keeping certain animals or items, such as a trampoline or pool, on the property may also cause an increase.

Although it is most common for rates to rise, they can also be lowered. Some car insurance companies offer good driver discounts, for example, or even lower rates for students who earn good grades in school. Changes or improvements to the item being insured can also cause premiums to go down; a house may qualify for a discount if it has a fire suppression system installed, for example, or a car with airbags may cost less to insure. Many insurance companies offer reductions or reimbursements for lifestyle changes, such as quitting smoking or joining a gym.

Payments and Missed Premiums

An insurance premium is usually collected in monthly, semi-yearly, or yearly payments, depending on the type of policy. Policyholders also often have the option of combining their payments with fees for other services, or taking out several types of policies with one company to lower the overall costs. For example, buying both car and renter's insurance from the same insurance company may give the buyer a discount on both.

If the policyholder fails to make a scheduled payment, the company can choose to cancel the plan entirely. This is often referred to as a "lapsed policy," and the customer will typically be required to either pay the balance of the insurance premium and be reinstated or the policy will be voided. Because the billing cycle can be lengthy in some cases, it is not uncommon for policy holders to forget to make a payment before the policy lapses. In almost all cases, a person cannot make a claim against a policy that is not current in premium payments.

A person also cannot receive a refund on his or her insurance payments, in most cases, even if he or she never makes a claim on the policy. While this may seem like a waste of money, one large claim can more than make up the difference, and having this peace of mind is worth it for most people. Life insurance works slightly differently, however, and it may be possible to withdraw money from the policy, borrow against it, or sell it for cash. Doing this may have tax implications, however, and may mean that the beneficiaries will not get the same amount of money after the policyholder dies.
Premium
Share on facebookShare on twitterShare on emailShare on print
The amount that must be paid for your health insurance or plan. You and/or your employer usually pay it monthly, quarterly or yearly.Insurance Is a Matter of Trust
Life is filled with unforeseeable events, such as a fender-bender on the way to work or sudden water damage at home. In these situations, it's important to know that you can rely on your insurance policy to protect you.
As an independent insurance agency, Premium Insurance Group helps you find insurance solutions tailored to your individual needs. We draw from a vast pool of personal, property and commercial insurance policies.
We invite you to explore our comprehensive consulting services and get to know our competent and friendly staff.
A disability can cause serious financial strain on a family. Given all the new, unexpected expenses, paying life insurance premiums might become a struggle. To help offset the financial stress of a disability, some insurance companies offer "waiver of premium" riders to life insurance customers.

What is a waiver-of-premium rider?

A waiver-of-premium rider is designed to protect life insurance customers from an unexpected disability that makes it difficult to pay premiums. Normally, inability to pay your life insurance premiums each month would result in cancellation of your coverage. The waiver-of-premium rider allows qualified life insurance customers who develop disabilities to stop paying their monthly premiums for the duration of their disabilities -- and keep their coverage.

A waiver-of-premium rider may come with extra perks. MassMutual, for example, lets those who become disabled and who have a term life insurance policies with waiver-of-premium riders convert their term insurance into permanent insurance. Because a permanent policy can be impossible to get when you're already disabled, this could be an attractive option.

Who qualifies for a waiver-of -premium rider?

To invoke the benefits of your waiver-of-premium rider, you must meet the specific guidelines included in your policy. Generally, the riders operate based on the following rules:

You must have a total disability. ING Financial Services (which offers the waiver on its employees' life insurance policies), for example, defines total disability as a condition that leaves you unable to perform your job. This can result from a mental disease, an illness or a bodily injury. Additionally, if you lose sight in both eyes or lose the use of at least one hand or foot, you can claim a waiver of premium after the specified time in your policy.
You must have had the disability for a certain amount of time. New York Life, for example, requires the insured person to be disabled continuously for six months. This time period varies with each life insurance company. In some cases, this requirement is waived. For example, ING will waive its four-month waiting period if you experience loss of sight or a limb.
You must meet certain age requirements. This also varies from company to company. ING allows employees only under age 56 to apply for the rider. New York Life, meanwhile, has restrictions based on how old you are when the disability begins -- if it begins after you hit age 65, your premiums won't be waived.

DEFINITION OF 'WAIVER OF PREMIUM RIDER'
A clause in an insurance policy that waives the policyholder's obligation to pay any further premiums should he or she become seriously ill or disabled. A waiver of premium allows people to benefit from an insurance policy, even when they cannot work.

INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'WAIVER OF PREMIUM RIDER'
For an upfront charge, most insurance companies will incorporate a waiver of premium into a policy. The waiver is usually associated with life insurance policies, and requires the policyholder to be disabled for a specified amount of time, such as being incapacitated for six months. To have a waiver of premium, some companies may also place other requirements on the policyholder, such as being healthy and below a certain age.
A benefit wherein the future premium payments by the insured are waived off under certain conditions is called premium waiver benefit.

Definition: A benefit wherein the future premium payments by the insured are waived off under certain conditions is called premium waiver benefit. This benefit can be availed usually in case of accident, disability or death of the person who was paying the premiums when the insured is incapable of paying premiums due to his loss of revenue.

Description: Usually insurance policies include the premium waiver clause, but in some cases an extra fee is charged to attain waiver of premium benefit. The premium waiver rider is beneficial in the event of any unforeseen exigency resulting in a complete or substantial loss of income to the insured. In this case, the policy will not lapse even if the premiums cease. The rider however entails some cost in the form of increased premiums.Waiver of premium.
If you have a waiver of premium provision in your long-term care or disability insurance policy, you may qualify to stop paying premiums once you've begun collecting benefits.
A waiver of premium provision increases the cost of your insurance, but means that you won't be left without coverage if you are no longer able to pay the premiums.
Group Life Waiver of Premium
Frequently asked questions
This brief overview answers some basic questions
about Sun Life Financial’s Waiver of Premium
provision. Your Group policy provides you with
more information. If you have additional questions
about Waiver of Premium, please contact your local
Sun Life Financial service representative.
What is “Waiver of Premium”?
The Waiver of Premium provision allows Group
Life insurance coverage to continue without
premium payments for employees who are Totally
Disabled, as defined in the Group policy. Coverage
is continued without further premium payments
from the employee or employer.
The Waiver of Premium provision varies by contract.
Please refer to your Group policy for details.
Who is eligible?
Generally, employees who are Totally Disabled
are eligible. Total disability must begin before the
employee retires or reaches the maximum age.
(Please check your Group policy for the maximum
Waiver of Premium age.)
page 1 of 3
What is Total Disability?
Generally, under the Waiver of Premium provision
for Life coverage, a person is considered totally
disabled if he or she is unable to perform the
material and substantial duties of any occupation
for which he or she is qualified (or becomes
reasonably qualified) due to education, training, or
experience. The disability must be caused by an
injury or sickness.
•	 Material means only the important and/or
productive duties of the occupation,
•	 Substantial means both the quantity and quality
of performance of the main, productive, and/or
important duties of the occupation.
For example, if John is a telemarketer for a
computer company, his material duties are making
telephone calls to people about products. He must
make 140 telephone calls per day and connect
with a “live” person while positively promoting the
product. This is a substantial duty of his job. The
quantity and quality expectations are known.
It is important not to confuse the definition of
Total Disability for Waiver of Premium with the
definition of Total Disability in your Long-Term
Disability (LTD) Group policy. For most standard
LTD contracts, a person is considered totally
disabled if he or she is unable to perform the
material and substantial duties of his or her own
occupation. The LTD definition of Total Disability
varies by contract. Refer to your Group LTD policy
for exact information.Disability examples
Sally Smith is a receptionist at a museum. Her duties mostly
include answering phones, directing visitors, and doing small
word processing projects. She breaks her arm and it is in a cast.
Sally can still perform the material duties of her job. She can
answer the phone with her other arm. She will not be able to
type; however, typing is a very small part of her job. Sally is
not eligible for Waiver of Premium benefits because she is not
considered to be totally disabled. She can still perform her
current job.
Marc Smith is a neurosurgeon. He damages his right hand and
loses two fingers. He can no longer perform surgery. He has the
education and background to teach medical school. He is not
eligible for Waiver of Premium because he is not considered to
be totally disabled. He can perform another job.
John Doe worked as an air traffic controller at a busy
metropolitan airport. As a result of an accident, he becomes
permanently and totally paralyzed from the neck down. He is
considered to be totally disabled and is eligible for Waiver of
Premium. He cannot perform any job.
Is the employee automatically considered
to be totally disabled if approved for
Social Security disability?
No. Sun Life does not rely on the Social Security Administration
decision. We perform our own in-depth medical and policy
eligibility review. We require objective medical evidence to
support any disability claim.
Is it possible to be approved for Long-Term Disability
benefits, but not for Waiver of Premium benefits?
Yes. Most Long-Term Disability contracts require that the
disability prevents an individual from performing his or her
own occupation. With Waiver of Premium, the individual has
to be unable to perform any occupation. Thus, a person may be
receiving LTD benefits for an LTD Total Disability, but not eligible
for Waiver of Premium.
What is the Waiting Period for Waiver of Premium
with Sun Life?
There is no Waiting Period for Waiver of Premium benefits. An
employee can apply as soon as he or she becomes
totally disabled.
What are the requirements for
Notice and Proof of claim?
Notice of Claim that the employee has become totally disabled,
while insured, must be provided within 12 months after the
employee ceases to be actively at work (the day that the
employee was last physically present at work).
Proof of Claim that the employee has become totally disabled,
while insured, must be provided within 15 months after the
employee ceases to be actively at work.
Please note: waiting too long to give Notice of Claim (beyond 12
months) voids the employee’s eligibility for Waiver of Premium.
When does the Waiver of
Premium provision terminate?
Generally, Waiver of Premium terminates under any one of the
following conditions:
•	 The employee ceases to be totally disabled
•	 The employee fails to provide required proof of
continued disability
•	 The employee ceases to be under the regular and continuing
care of a physician
For some policies, Waiver of Premium terminates:
•	 When the employee retires
•	 When the employee reaches age 70
For the purposes of the Waiver of Premium provision, an
employee is considered to be retired when he or she receives any
compensation from a retirement or pension plan of the employer,
or when he or she reaches age 70, whichever is earlier. The
specific terms and conditions of eligibility and terminations are
outlined in your Group policy.
What if the employee is not eligible for
Waiver of Premium, or reaches age 70?
The employee may have the option to elect Life Conversion
within 31 days of the termination of Group Life insurance. This
allows the employee to purchase an individual Life Insurance
policy.
What if the employee also has Dependent Life
and/or AD&D coverage?
Once the employee is approved for Waiver of Premium,
Dependent and AD&D coverage is cancelled. However,
dependents have the option of applying for Life Conversion
upon cancellation of Group Life coverage. AD&D coverage
cannot be converted.
Do age reductions for Life insurance apply?
Yes. Where the schedule of benefits provides for reductions at
certain ages, these same reductions will apply to any amount
continued under the Waiver of Premium provision.
Can the employer simply terminate the employee
from the Group Life policy?
Yes. However, if the employee is out of work due to sickness
or injury, the employer may continue Group Life coverage if the
appropriate premium is paid for the employee for up
to 12 months.
Before making any premium adjustments, please make sure
you have received notice from Sun Life that the employee’s
Waiver of Premium has been approved.
If you receive notice that the employee’s Waiver of Premium has
been declined, the disabled employee still may have the option
of applying for Life Conversion upon termination.
When can the employer stop paying
premiums for the employee?
Premium can be continued for up to 12 months for the employee
until Sun Life notifies the employer that Waiver of Premium has
been approved. We also will notify the employer of any credits
that can be taken on the premium statement.
What if an employee has applied for Waiver of
Premium, but the employer terminates the
Group policy before a decision is made?
If the employee is in the Waiver process and is found to be
ineligible, and the employer has terminated the Group policy
with Sun Life, then the employee may still have the option to
apply for Life Conversion.
If the employee is found to be eligible for Waiver of Premium,
Sun Life will continue the employee’s Life coverage until his or
her eligibility ends, no matter who the new carrier is for the
employer. The terminated Group policy provisions will still apply
to that employee.
What if the employee had not applied
for Waiver of Premium but was totally disabled
at the time the employer terminated coverage
with Sun Life?
An employee’s rights to any Waiver of Premium benefits are not
affected by the subsequent termination of the Group policy. If
the employee can provide proof of claim within 15 months of
the disability, he or she could be eligible for Wavier of Premium
benefits. For example:
•	 ABC Company terminates its Group policy on
December 1, 2010.
•	 An employee files a claim and Sun Life receives it on
January 1, 2011.
•	 The employee was disabled on November 1, 2010, and has
proof of disability.
•	 The employee is found to be totally disabled and is eligible for
Waiver of Premium.
Please note: To be eligible for Waiver of Premium, the employee
must file Notice of Claim within 12 months of the date he or
she was last physically at work. Proof of Claim must be provided
within 15 months.
A waiver of premium rider is language in an insurance policy that allows the insured to stop making premium payments if he or she becomes ill or disabled.

How it works/Example:

For example, let's assume that John Doe has a life insurance policy with Company XYZ. He buys a waiver of premium rider. John then makes his monthly payments like clockwork for 10 years. Then, he gets hit by a car and can no longer work. Because of the waiver of premium rider, John Doe's life insurance does not lapse, and when he dies a year later, his beneficiaries receive the proceeds of his life insurance policy.

Waiver of premium riders cost extra and they may have certain time or age limits, so it's important to read the fine print. Often, the disability has to last at least six months.

Why it Matters:

A waiver of premium rider prevents a whole or universal life insurance policy from lapsing just because the policyholder has become disabled or can no longer work. In turn, it protects the insured's beneficiaries, who may need the eventual proceeds from the policy to pay for college, housing or other living expenses when the insured dies.Life assurance is a great way to help protect your loved ones in the event of your death.
But what if you were unable to work due to incapacity caused by illness or injury and could no longer afford the premiums? Waiver of Premium could be the solution.
For an additional cost, the Waiver of Premium benefit can be added at the start of your policy. However, this cannot be added later on. You're responsible for maintaining your premiums for the first 26 weeks of incapacity, after 26 weeks, we’ll waive your monthly payments, giving you one less thing to think about.
Your premiums are waived when you are too ill to undertake your normal occupation for 26 weeks or more due to incapacity caused by illness or injury. 
THINGS YOU NEED TO KNOW
You must be under age 55 and accepted on standard terms and normal rates.
If you are not in work before the onset of incapacity, your premiums are waived after 26 weeks if you are unable to perform three of the following specified work tasks:
Walking - The ability to walk more than 200 metres on a level surface.
Climbing - the ability to climb up a flight of 12 stairs and down again, using the handrail if needed.
Lifting - the ability to pick up an object weighing 2kg at table height and hold for 60 seconds before replacing the object on the table. 
Bending - the ability to bend or kneel to touch the floor and straighten up again
Getting in and out of a car - the ability to get into a standard saloon car, and get out again.
Writing - the manual dexterity to write legibly using a pen or pencil, or type using a desktop computer keyboard.
We will continue to waive premiums until one of the following occurs: 
you're fit to return to work;
your policy ends; or
you no longer fulfil our definition of incapacity.
A liability waiver is a legal document that a person who participates in an activity may sign to acknowledge the risks involved in his or her participation. By doing so, the company attempts to remove legal liability from the business or person responsible for the activity. The enforceability of such a waiver depends on state law, a jury, and the language of the waiver.[1] Liability waivers include pre-accident releases and model releases (for pictures). Liability waivers often have no legal standing and most are found to be unenforceable. For example, the Wisconsin supreme court has considered exculpatory agreements six times in the last 25 years and held the agreement in question unenforceable each time.[2] Reckless or intentional actions can never be disclaimed and liability resulting from a faulty product cannot be waived.[3]
Waiver of Liability, Release
Assumption of Risk & Indemnity Agreement
It is the purpose of this agreement to exempt, waive and relieve releasees from liability for personal injury, property damage, and
wrongful death, including if caused by negligence, including the negligence, if any, of releasees. “Releasees” include USA Hockey,
Inc., its affiliate associations, local associations, member teams, event hosts, other participants, coaches, officials, sponsors, advertisers,
and each of them, their officers, directors, agents and employees.
For and in consideration of the undersigned participant’s registration with USA Hockey, Inc., its affiliates, local associations and
member teams (all referred to together as USAH) and being allowed to participate in USAH events and member team activities,
participant (and the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of participant, if applicable) waive, release and relinquish any and all claims for
liability and cause(s) of action, including for personal injury, property damage or wrongful death occurring to participant, arising out
of participation in USAH events, member team activities, the sport of ice hockey, and/or activities incidental thereto, whenever or
however they occur and for such period said activities may continue, and by this agreement any such claims, rights, and causes of action
that participant (and participant’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s), if applicable) may have are hereby waived, released and relinquished,
and participant (and parent(s)/guardian(s), if applicable) does(do) so on behalf of my/our and participant’s heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns.
Participant (and participant’s parent(s)/guardian(s), if applicable) acknowledge, understand and assume all risks relating to ice hockey
and any member team activities, and understand that ice hockey and member team activities involve risks to participant’s person
including bodily injury, partial or total disability, paralysis and death, and damages which may arise therefrom and that I/we have full
knowledge of said risks. These risks and dangers may be caused by the negligence of the participant or the negligence of others,
including the “releasees” identified below. These risks and dangers include, but are not limited to, those arising from participating with
bigger, faster and stronger participants, and these risks and dangers will increase if participant participates in ice hockey and member
team activities in an age group above that which participant would normally participate in. I/We further acknowledge that there may be
risks and dangers not known to us or not reasonably foreseeable at this time. Participant (and participant’s parent(s)/guardian(s), if
applicable) acknowledge, understand and agree that all of the risks and dangers described throughout this agreement, including those
caused by the negligence of participant and/or others, are included within the waiver, release and relinquishment described in the
preceding paragraph. I/We agree to abide by and be bound under the rules of USA Hockey, including the By-Laws of the corporation
and the arbitration clause provisions, as currently published. Copies are available to USA Hockey members upon written request.
Participant (and participant’s parent(s)/guardian(s), if applicable) acknowledge, understand and assume the risks, if any, arising from
the conditions and use of ice hockey rinks and related premises and acknowledge and understand that included within the scope of this
waiver and release is any cause of action (including any cause of action based on negligence) arising from the performance, or failure
to perform, maintenance, inspection, supervision or control of said areas and for the failure to warn of dangerous conditions existing at
said rinks, for negligent selection of certain releasees, or negligent supervision or instruction by releasees.
If the law in any controlling jurisdiction renders any part of this agreement unenforceable, the remainder of this agreement shall
nevertheless remain enforceable to the full extent, if any, allowed by controlling law. This agreement affects your legal rights, and you
may wish to consult an attorney concerning this agreement.
Participant (and participant’s parent(s)/guardian(s), if applicable) agree if any claim for participant’s personal injury or wrongful death
is commenced against releasees, he/she shall defend, indemnify and save harmless releasees from any and all claims or causes of action
by whomever or wherever made or presented for participant’s personal injuries, property damage or wrongful death.
Participant (and participant’s parent(s)/guardian(s), if applicable) acknowledge that they have been provided and have read the above
paragraphs and have not relied upon any representations of releasees, that they are fully advised of the potential dangers of ice hockey
and understand these waivers and releases are necessary to allow amateur ice hockey to exist in its present form. Significant exclusions
may apply to USA Hockey’s insurance policies, which could affect any coverage. For example, there is no liability coverage for claims
of one player against another player. Read your brochure carefully and, if you have any questions, contact USA Hockey or a District
Risk Manager.RELEASE AND WAIVER OF LIABILITY, ASSUMPTION OF RISK, AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT
WITH PARENTAL CONSENT (“AGREEMENT”)
IN CONSIDERATION of being permitted to participate in any way in any event (“Activity”) at any time during the current
calendar year I, for myself, my personal representatives, assigns, heirs, and next of kin:
1. ACKNOWLEDGE, agree, and represent that I understand the nature of the Activity and that I am qualified, in good
health, and in proper physical condition to participate in such Activity. I further agree and warrant that if, at any time, I
believe the conditions to be unsafe, I will immediately discontinue further participation in the Activity.
2. FULLY UNDERSTAND that: (a) THIS ACTIVITY INVOLVES RISKS AND DANGERS OF SERIOUS BODILY INJURY, INCLUDING
PERMANENT DISABILITY, PARALYSIS, AND DEATH (“Risks”); (b) these Risks and dangers may be caused by my own actions
or inactions, the actions or inactions of others participating in the Activity, the conditions in which the Activity takes
place, or THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE “RELEASEES” NAMED BELOW; (c) there may be OTHER RISKS or SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
LOSSES either not known to me or not readily foreseeable at this time; and I FULLY ACCEPT AND ASSUME ALL SUCH RISKS
AND ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR LOSSES, COSTS, AND DAMAGES I incur as a result of my participation, or that of the minor,
in the Activity.
3. HEREBY RELEASE, DISCHARGE, AND COVENANT NOT TO SUE the sanctioning organization(s), their administrators,
directors, agents, officers, members, volunteers, and employees, other participants, officials, rescue personnel, sponsors,
advertisers, owners and lessees of Premises on which the Activity is conducted, (each of the forgoing shall be considered
one of the RELEASEES herein) FROM ALL LIABILITY, CLAIMS, DEMANDS, LOSSES, OR DAMAGES ON MY ACCOUNT CAUSED,
OR ALLEGED TO BE CAUSED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART BY THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE RELEASEES OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING
NEGLIGENT RESCUE OPERATIONS; AND I FURTHER AGREE that if, despite this RELEASE AND WAIVER OF LIABILITY,
ASSUMPTION OF RISK, AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT I, or anyone on my behalf, makes a claim against any of the
Releasees, I WILL INDEMNIFY, SAVE, AND HOLD HARMLESS EACH OF THE RELEASEES from any litigation expenses, attorney
fees, loss, liability, damage, or cost which may be incurred as the result of such claim.
I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I AM AGE 18 OR OLDER, HAVE READ THIS AGREEMENT AND FULLY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS,
UNDERSTAND THAT I HAVE GIVEN UP SUBSTANTIAL RIGHTS BY SIGNING IT, HAVE SIGNED IT FREELY AND WITHOUT ANY INDUCEMENT
OR ASSURANCE OF ANY NATURE, AND I INTEND IT TO BE A COMPLETE AND UNCONDITIONAL RELEASE OF ALL
LIABILITY TO THE GREATEST EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW AND AGREE THAT IF ANY PORTION OF THIS AGREEMENT IS HELD
TO BE INVALID, THE BALANCE, NOTWITHSTANDING, SHALL CONTINUE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT.
PRINTED NAME OF PARTICIPANT:
PARTICIPANT’S SIGNATURE:
ADDRESS:
 (Street) (City) (State) (Zip)
PHONE: DATE:
MINOR RELEASE: (must be completed by Parent/Guardian for any participant under the age of 18)
AND I, THE MINOR’S PARENT AND/OR LEGAL GUARDIAN, UNDERSTAND THE NATURE OF THE ACTIVITY AND THE MINOR’S
EXPERIENCE AND CAPABILITIES AND BELIEVE THE MINOR TO BE QUALIFIED, IN GOOD HEALTH, AND IN PROPER PHYSICAL
CONDITION TO PARTICIPATE IN SUCH ACTIVITY. I HEREBY RELEASE, DISCHARGE, COVENANT NOT TO SUE, AND AGREE TO
INDEMNIFY AND SAVE AND HOLD HARMLESS EACH OF THE RELEASEES FROM ALL LIABILITY, CLAIMS, DEMANDS, LOSSES, OR
DAMAGES ON THE MINOR’S ACCOUNT CAUSED, OR ALLEGED TO BE CAUSED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART BY THE NEGLIGENCE OF
THE “RELEASEES” OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING NEGLIGENT RESCUE OPERATIONS AND FURTHER AGREE THAT IF, DESPITE THIS
RELEASE, I, THE MINOR, OR ANYONE ON THE MINOR’S BEHALF MAKES A CLAIM AGAINST ANY OF THE RELEASEES NAMED
ABOVE, I WILL INDEMNIFY, SAVE, AND HOLD HARMLESS EACH OF THE RELEASEES FROM ANY LITIGATION EXPENSES,
ATTORNEY FEES, LOSS LIABILITY, DAMAGE, OR ANY COST THAT MAY OCCUR AS A RESULT OF ANY SUCH CLAIM. 
IN CONSIDERATION of being permitted to compete, officiate, observe, work for, or participate in any way in the EVENT(S) or being permitted to enter for any purpose any
RESTRICTED AREA (defined as any area requiring special authorization, credentials, or permission to enter or any area to which admission by the general public is restricted or
prohibited), EACH OF THE UNDERSIGNED, for himself, his personal representatives, heirs, and next of kin:
1. Acknowledges, agrees, and represents that he has or will immediately upon entering any of such RESTRICTED AREAS, and will continuously thereafter, inspect the
RESTRICTED AREAS which he enters, and he/she further agrees and warrants that, if at any time, he is in or about RESTRICTED AREAS and he feels anything to be unsafe, he
will immediately advise the officials of such and if necessary will leave the RESTRICTED AREAS and/or refuse to participate further in the EVENT(S).
2. HEREBY RELEASES, WAIVES, DISCHARGES AND COVENANTS NOT TO SUE the promoters, participants, racing associations, sanctioning organizations or any
subdivision thereof, track operators, track owners, officials, car owners, drivers, pit crews, rescue personnel, any persons in any RESTRICTED AREA, promoters, sponsors,
advertisers, owners and lessees of premises used to conduct the EVENT(S), premises and event inspectors, surveyors, underwriters, consultants and others who give
recommendations, directions, or instructions or engage in risk evaluation or loss control activities regarding the premises or EVENT(S) and each of them, their directors, officers,
agents and employees, all for the purpose herein referred to as “Releasees,” FROM ALL LIABILITY TO THE UNDERSIGNED, his personal representatives, assigns, heirs, and
next of kin FOR ANY AND ALL LOSS OR DAMAGE, AND ANY CLAIM OR DEMANDS THEREFOR ON ACCOUNT OF INJURY TO THE PERSON OR PROPERTY OR
RESULTING IN DEATH OF THE UNDERSIGNED ARISING OUT OF OR RELTED TO THE EVENT(S), WHETHER CAUSED BY THE NEGLIENCE OF THE
RELEASEES OR OTHERWISE.
3. HEREBY AGREES TO INDEMNIFY AND SAVE AND HOLD HARMLESS the Releasees and each of them FROM ANY LOSS, LIABILITY, DAMAGE, OR COST they
may incur arising out of or related to the EVENT(S) WHETHER CAUSED BY THE NEGLIENCE OF THE RELEASEES OR OTHERWISE.

4. HEREBY ASSUMES FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY RISK OF BODILY INJURY, DEATH OR PROPERTY DAMAGE arising out of or related to the EVENT(S)
whether caused by the NEGLIGENCE OF RELEASEES or otherwise.
5. HEREBY acknowledges that THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EVENT(S) ARE VERY DANGEROUS and involve the risk of serious injury and/or death and/or property damage.
Each of THE UNDERSIGNED, also expressly acknowledges that INJURIES RECEIVED MAY BE COMPOUNDED OR INCREASED BY NEGLIGENT RESCUE
OPERATIONS OR PROCEDURES OF THE RELEASEES.
6. HEREBY agrees that this Release and Waiver of Liability, Assumption of Risk and Indemnity Agreement extends to all acts of negligence by the Releasees, INCLUDING
NEGLIGENT RESCUE OPERATIONS and is intended to be as broad and inclusive as is permitted by the laws of the Province or State in which the Event(s) is/are conducted and
that if any portion thereof is held invalid, it is agreed that the balance shall, notwithstanding, continue in full legal force and effect.
I HAVE READ THIS RELEASE AND WAIVER OF LIABILITY, ASSUMPTION OF RISK AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT, FULLY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS,
UNDERSTAND THAT I HAVE GIVEN UP SUBSTANTIAL RIGHTS BY SIGNING IT, AND HAVE SIGNED IT FREELY AND VOLUNTARILY WITHOUT ANY
INDUCEMENT, ASSURANCE OR GUARANTEE BEING MADE TO ME AND INTEND MY SIGNATURE TO BE A COMPLETEAND UNCONDITIONAL RELEASE OF
ALL LIABILITY TO THE GREATEST EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW
A release of liability is used in many different scenarios, such as sporting events, organized trips, or other risky activities. This agreement dictates that the party participating will not hold the organization responsible for things like personal injury, death, or loss of property. A release of liability form can help an organization or business from being sued if something were to go wrong.

In order to be valid, a release of liability must be signed and dated. It should include the names of both parties. A copy of the release of liability form should be kept by the participant as well as the person or organization sponsoring the event.

Having a release of liability form available for your company is very important. If you need a release of liability form, you will want to check the regulations for your state. Ensure that you include all the required information so that your release form is valid.INSURANCE WAIVERS

The University of Texas Board of Regents requires all international students to have medical insurance coverage. For this reason, enrollment in the UT Student Health Insurance Plan is automatic at the time of registration, and the cost of the policy is included in the student’s tuition and fee bill. Students holding comparable coverage may be eligible to waive enrollment in the UT Studet Health Insurance Plan.  

Please be aware the UT System student health insurance requirements for the 2014-2015 academic year have changed to comply with the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA).  Insurance waiver requests granted in the past may not meet the new requirements.  The UT Student Health Insurance Plan exceeds the requirements of the new law, and we believe it is a good value for coverage.  More information is available on our website here about the UT Student Health Insurance Plan and using health insurance in the United States.  You can read more about the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) here. Massachusetts law requires that any full-time or part-time student enrolled in an institution of higher learning in Massachusetts participate in a qualifying student health insurance program or in a health plan of comparable coverage. All Harvard students are automatically enrolled in the Harvard University Student Health Program (HUSHP) and charges are applied to their student bill.Damage waiver, or as it is often referred to, collision damage waiver (CDW) or loss damage waiver (LDW), is an optional damage coverage available while renting a vehicle. In many countries, it is a legal requirement to have CDW insurance included in the basic car rental rate. It covers the rental vehicle. Some companies also offer liability insurance and towing coverage.

Terms and prices vary among car rental companies and locations. Alternatives include other vehicle insurance policies, some credit card coverage, and some travel insurance.

Contents  [hide] 
1 Risks addressed
2 Insurance or not?
3 Credit card coverage of damage waiver
3.1 Cards issued in the US, and Trinidad and Tobago
4 See also
5 References
Risks addressed[edit]
Liability. If the car damages property or injures someone, the customer or other insurance must pay for the damages (liability). US car rental companies sometimes include minimum liability insurance required by law in the basic rental charge. Hertz includes it in all states except California.[1] Avis includes it in all states except California and Texas, at least for renters who lack their own coverage.[2] Other companies do not publicize where they include liability insurance in the basic rental charge. Some car rental companies offer more liability insurance for a fee.[3][4]

Collision, theft, other damage. When a customer does not pay the car rental company to waive damage, and a rented car is stolen, or damaged by accident, vandalism, weather (hail), etc., the customer or other insurance must pay to the rental company the full cost of repair, plus administrative charges and, in some states, loss of use.

The rental company's damage waiver normally covers accidental damage and towing a damaged vehicle, as long as the renter complies with the rental contract (such as authorized drivers, locations, no racing). Waivers may also cover theft, vandalism, loss of use, and liability. The renter often has a choice among different coverages for different fees.

Damage waivers are not necessarily complete. They may have deductibles (also called excess) and limits on the amount covered.[5] Liability coverage always has limits.

The descriptions above come from rental company websites, under headings like Policies, FAQ, Coverage, or More.[6][7][8][9]

Damage Waivers can be bought from the car rental company in most countries, or through a car hire excess insurer in the UK,[10] or through travel insurers.[11] Coverage from the car rental company may be required if the renter lacks proof of coverage elsewhere.[12][13]

Insurance or not?[edit]
CDW meets the basic definition of insurance, since it transfers some risk from the car renter to the rental company. However rental companies do not call it insurance, since it is a waiver between the renter and the company that the company waives their right to charge the renter for valid damages to the vehicle. Rental companies are not licensed or regulated as insurers. There are also no claims made. Rental companies treat CDW as a waiver of their right to make the renter pay for damage to the car.[14]

Credit card coverage of damage waiver[edit]
Cards issued in the US, and Trinidad and Tobago[edit]
Some credit cards offer insurance for theft or damage to rented cars. Usually any such insurance from a card is "secondary," meaning that if the renter has any personal or business vehicle insurance with appropriate coverage, that will pay first. Then the renter can claim from the credit card company to pay the primary insurance's deductible, plus addressing large claims above the primary insurance limits.

If the renter has no other vehicle insurance for the specific claim (no insurance at all, or not in the relevant country, or no collision insurance, etc.), the credit card company (if it offers coverage) will pay the whole amount, up to its limits.

All four credit card companies listed below cover collision damage with some of their cards. The main difference among the cards is that Discover covers nothing else; Visa and some MasterCards and American Express cards also cover theft, while other MasterCards and American Express cards include theft, vandalism, hitting a deer or chipping a window (sources at bottom of table).

Other issues important to some renters are that Discover and American Express cover only the cardholder, not helpful when people share a car rental. Visa and MasterCard only cover rental contracts of 15 days or less (not even the first 15 days of longer rentals). Some American Express and MasterCards are not useful on dirt or gravel roads, since they exclude "damage sustained on any surface, other than a bound surface such as concrete or tarmac".[15] Some Discover cards exclude private roads, such as shopping centers and some subdivisions.[16]

MasterCard and Visa in the United States say they cover "Physical damage and/or theft", but an introductory paragraph for some MasterCards[17] and all Visa[18] cards limits this to "collision or theft," so vandalism and hail are excluded. It may be ambiguous whether deer impacts and glass chips are covered as "collisions." MasterCards from Bank of America and MBNA generally have a simpler opening paragraph, which leaves coverage in place for any physical damage.[19]

Even among these brands, some cards lack coverage entirely, especially debit cards and cards with low credit limits. The AmEx Platinum Cash Rebate card, for example, has no coverage. MasterCard "Standard" cards lack coverage, while "Premier", "Gold" and "Platinum" cards vary in their coverage. Citi® / AAdvantage®, Citi ThankYou®, Citi® Dividend or Citi CashReturns® MasterCard-branded cards are notable for providing coverage worldwide without geographic exclusions,[20] while most other MasterCard, Visa and American Express cards exclude coverage in Ireland, Israel, Jamaica.

These schemes apply to cards issued in the US, Trinidad and Tobago,[21] and apparently nowhere else. In addition, no credit card will cover a rental that is being billed to a third party, such as in the event that an insurance company is being directly billed for the rental.

The following table is an effort at a summary, though not guaranteed. Coverage is complex and changes periodically. Telephone staff do not know the changes. Formal insurance policies govern and are not easily available to cardholders, who are only given summaries, like the links below.

"Loss of use" and administration fees are often advertised as covered by credit cards. However, credit card companies pay these items only if the rental car company provides proof. If rental car company does not provide proof, there seems little reason for the renter to pay either.
Loan protection insurance or payment protection insurance (PPI) is designed to help policyholders by providing financial support in time of need. Whether the need is due to disability or unemployment, this insurance can help protect monthly loan payments and protect the insured from default.Personal loans are a great lifestyle convenience. But if you become sick or injured and can’t work or suddenly lose your job, that debt could quickly get out of control.

Having Personal Loan Protection to help cover your repayments means you’ll have one less thing to worry about:

Get your monthly repayments paid for up to 90 days if you unexpectedly lose your job (subject to a 14 day waiting period)
Get your monthly repayments paid while you’re sick or injured and can’t work1 (subject to a 30 day waiting period)
Have any balance owing paid off up to $100,000 if you pass away (so loved ones aren’t left with this debt)
You can claim even if entitled to benefits from another source, such as workers compensation, sick leave or Centrelink.
Of course, like all insurance, some exclusions, limits and conditions apply. For example, if you voluntarily resign or accept a voluntary redundancy you aren’t covered for job loss. Also, if you were not working at least 15 hours or more per week when you became unfit for work, you  will  not be covered.

Personal Loan Protection is easy to arrange

Simply add the insurance when applying for a Westpac Personal Loan
No medical examination required to apply1
You don’t pay more because of age, job, or health record.
1. Please note:  An exclusion applies for sickness, injury or disease occurring within 180 days of the commencement date for which you sought or obtained medical advice or treatment during the 180 days prior to the commencement date.Loan protection insurance or payment protection insurance (PPI) is designed to help policyholders by providing financial support in time of need. Whether the need is due to disability or unemployment, this insurance can help protect monthly loan payments and protect the insured from default. The loan protection policy has different terms depending on where it is offered. In Britain, it could be referred to as accident sickness insurance, unemployment insurance, redundancy insurance or premium protection insurance. These all provide very similar coverage. In the U.S. it is oftentimes referred to as payment protection insurance (PPI). The U.S. offers several forms of this insurance in conjunction with mortgages, personal or car loans. Read on to find out how these insurances work and if they could be right for you.

How Does Loan Protection Insurance Work?
Loan protection can help policyholders meet their monthly debts up to a predetermined amount. These policies offer short-term protection, providing coverage from generally 12 to 24 months depending on the insurance company and policy. The benefits of the policy can be used to pay off personal loans, car loans or credit cards. Policies are for usually people from age 18-65 who are working at the time the policy is purchased. In many cases to qualify, the purchaser has to be employed at least 16 hours a week on a long term contract, or be self-employed for a specified period of time.

The two different types of loan protection insurance policies are:

Standard Policy
This policy disregards the age, gender, occupation and smoking habits of the policyholder. The policyholder can decide what amount of coverage he or she wants. This type of policy is widely available through loan providers. It does not pay until after the initial 60-day exclusion period. Maximum coverage is 24 months.

Age-Related Policy
In this case, the cost is determined by the age and amount of coverage the policyholder wants to have. This type of policy is only offered in Britain. Maximum coverage is for 12 months. Quotes might be less expensive because according to insurance providers, younger policyholders tend to make fewer claims. Depending on the company you choose to provide your insurance, the loan protection policies sometimes includes a death benefit. For either type of policy, the policyholder pays a monthly premium in return for the security of knowing that the policy will pay when the policyholder is unable to meet loan payments.

Insurance providers have different starting dates for when to begin coverage. Generally, an insured policyholder can submit a claim 30 to 90 days after continuous unemployment or incapacity from the date the policy began. The amount the coverage pays will depend on the insurance policy.

What Are the Costs?
The cost of payment protection insurance depends on where you live, the type of policy you select, whether it is standard or age-related and how much coverage you would like to have. Loan protection insurance can be very expensive. If you have poor credit history, you might end up paying an even higher premium for coverage.

If you think this type of insurance is something you need, consider looking for a discount insurance group that offers this service. Premiums through large banks and lenders are generally higher than independent brokers, and the vast majority of policies are sold when a loan is taken out. You have the option of choosing whether to buy the insurance separately at a later date, which can save you hundreds of dollars. When buying a policy with a mortgage, credit card, or any other type of loan, a lender can add the cost of the insurance to the loan and then charge interest on both, which could potentially double the cost of borrowing. Get the policy that best applies to your needs and current situation; otherwise you could pay more than you have to.

Pros and Cons of Having Loan Protection
Depending on how well you research the different policies, having a loan protection policy can pay off when you select a policy that is inexpensive and will provide the coverage that is suitable for you.


In terms of credit score, having a loan protection insurance policy helps maintain your current credit score because the policy enables you to keep up-to-date with loan payments. By allowing you to continue paying your loans in times of financial crisis, your credit score is not affected.

Having this type of insurance does not necessarily help lower loan interest rates. When you shop for a policy, be leery of loan providers that try to make it seem like your loan interest will decrease if you also buy a payment protection insurance policy through them. What really happens in this case is that the loan interest rate difference from the now "lowered" rate is latched onto the loan protection policy, giving the illusion that your loan interest rate has decreased, when in fact the costs were just transferred to the loan protection insurance policy.

What to Look out for 
It is important to point out that PPI coverage is not required in order to be approved for a loan. Some loan providers make you believe this, but you can definitely shop with an independent insurance provider rather than buy a payment protection plan from the company that originally provided the loan.

An insurance policy can contain many clauses and exclusions; you should review all of them before determining whether a particular policy is right for you. For those working full time with employer benefits you migh not even need this type of insurance because many employees are covered through their jobs, which offer disability and sick pay for an average of six months.

When reviewing the clauses and policy exclusions, be sure you qualify for submitting claims. The last thing you want to have happen when the unexpected occurs is to discover you aren't qualified to submit a claim. Unfortunately, some unscrupulous companies sell polices to clients who don't even qualify. Always be well informed before you sign a contract.

Make sure that you know all loan protection insurance terms, conditions and exclusions. If this information is on the insurer's website, print it out. If the information is not listed on the website, request that the provider fax, email, or mail it to you before you sign up. Any ethical company is more than willing to do this for a prospective client. If the company hesitates in any way, move on to another provider.

Policies differ, so check terms and conditions of the coverage to see what exclusions and clauses are stated in the policy and when they would start. Review the policy carefully. Some policies do not allow you to receive a payout under the following circumstances:

If your job is part-time
If you are self-employed
If you can't work because of a pre-existing medical condition
If you are only working on a short-term contract
If you are incapable of working at any other job other than your current job
Understand which health-related issues are excluded from coverage. For example, because diseases are being diagnosed earlier, illnesses, such as cancer, heart attack and stroke might not serve as a claim for the policyholder because they are not considered as critical as they would've been years ago when medical technology wasn't as advanced.

The Bottom Line
When searching for a loan or PPI, always thoroughly read the terms, conditions and exclusions of the policy before committing yourself. Look for a reputable company. One way is to contact the consumer advocacy facility where you live. A consumer advocacy group should be able to direct you to ethically responsible providers.

Review your particular financial situation in detail to make certain that getting a policy is the best approach for you. A loan protection policy does not necessarily fit everyone's situation. Determine why you might need it; see if you have other emergency sources of income through either savings from your job or other sources. Go through all exclusions and clauses. Will getting the insurance be cost-effective for you? Are you confident and comfortable with the company that is handling your policy? These are all issues that must be addressed carefully before making such an important decision. 
PERSONAL LOANS INSURANCE TERMS AND CONDITIONS
Group Credit Life Takaful provides takaful benefit, covering your Standard Chartered Bank Personal Finance outstanding balance for a nominal
charge.
SCHEME HIGHLIGHTS
• 24 hour cover for Group Credit Life Takaful
• Easy enrolment
• No requirement for a medical
• Low one time rate on the total amount of your Personal Finance
SUMMARY OF POLICY CONDITIONS OF MASTER POLICY
1. Low one time rate will be applied and the insurance premium will be added to your loan amount and amortized over the life of the loan.
2. To qualify for cover under the policy, the Protected Person should be older than 18 and younger than 65 years. Coverage under this policy for
 Death & PTD ceases when the Participant attains the age of 65 years.
3. Death and PTD Benefit cover is applicable worldwide.
4. PTD and Deathcover applies to any cause except those expressly excluded in terms of the policy or the Good Health Declaration in the
 Personal Finance application form.
5. Death and PTD payable under this policy shall be paid against the Protected Person’s total outstanding balance at the end of the month
 with the Bank.
7. The Bank reserves the right, at any time, to change the terms, conditions, rates and/or reject, discontinue or cancel the applicable Takaful Cover
 without assigning any reason.
8. The Protected Person should be a resident in the Kingdom of Bahrain at the time of sourcing the Policy. Any Protected Person shall be covered
 even in an instance where the Event of Claim occurred outside the Kingdom of Bahrain.
DEFINITIONS
Actively-at-Work – The work situation of a person performing any gainful activity or work, or engaging in any business or occupation for remuneration
or profit, excluding those who are disabled, or granted a leave of absence due to disease or bodily injury.
Claim – A written demand made to the Company by the Bank for the payment of benefits under this Contract.
Contract Application – The Declaration of Good Health or Medical Questionnaire that the Customer accomplishes and submits as part of the
Company’s underwriting requirements.
Contract Schedules – The schedules which provide the conditions of this Contract and the data on the Bank’s Customers and amount of
Contributions payable. The data includes: Initial financing amount; financing inception and termination dates; amount of charges, if any; limitations
and additional exclusions, if any.
Contract Year – A coverage term of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months under this Contract from the Effective Date or any anniversary date
thereof.
Contributions – The amounts payable by the Bank as a contribution for the Participants who shall be covered under this Contract.
Customer – An individual person indebted or becoming indebted under the terms of a personal financing agreement with the Bank.
Effective Date – The date this Contract commences.
Financing Inception Date – The date on which the personal financing agreement takes effect.
Financing Termination Date – The date on which the last instalment under the personal financing agreement falls due.
Hazardous Activity – Any activity which exposes the Participant to serious Injury or Illness including but not limited to shooting, motor sports, water
sports (e.g. diving, jet-skiing, power boats, water ski), horse riding activities (e.g. hunting, jumping, polo), climbing activities (e.g. mountaineering
and rock-climbing), winter sports (e.g. bob-sleighing, snowboarding, ice-hockey, snow-skiing, ski-jumping), ballooning, bungee jumping, sky diving,
parachuting, paragliding, and martial arts of all kinds.
Initial Financing Amount – The total initial financing of a Customer at the inception of the personal financing agreement.
Instalment – The periodic payment made by a Customer to the Bank covering both the principal and profit/interest under a financing agreement.
Mudarabah – An investment contract whereby an individual or a group of individuals appoints a third party, called Mudarib, to invest their assets in
a Shari’ah compliant manner for a pre-agreed share on investment income
Mudarib Profit Share – A ratio of profit from total gross revenue less direct expense related to the investment payable to the Company.
Outstanding Financing Balance – The portion of the principal amount under a personal financing agreement that is still due and payable excluding
charges for late payment, if any.
Participant – Any person eligible for coverage and enrolled under this Contract.
Personal Financing Agreement – A financing agreement made in writing between and duly executed by or on behalf of a Customer and the Bank,
which requires payments of the sums due in accordance with the agreement by equal monthly instalments.
Prepayment – Provision in a financing agreement under which a Customer may pay off a financing ahead of the scheduled financing termination
date.
Qardh Al-Hasan – A financing which is returned at the end of the agreed period without any interest or share in the profit or loss of the business.
Repayment Period – The period during which the Customer shall be required under the terms of a personal financing agreement to make equal
monthly payments of the sums due under said agreement.
Wakalah – An Islamic contract where a representative, called Wakeel, is appointed to undertake transactions on another person’s behalf.
Wakalah Fees – A set percentage of the Contributions which shall be paid by the Bank to the Company to cover the cost of sales, distribution,
collection of contributions, customer service and administration, as well as the cost of handling any claims.
SCOPE OF COVER
Death Benefit
If a Protected Person dies due to sickness or an accident, the Takaful Company will, upon receipt of due proof in writing of the death of the Protected
Person, pay the amount of the Takaful Cover Benefit to the Bank.
The Takaful Cover Benefit, at any time before the maturity date of the Personal Finance, shall be equal to 100 % of the Outstanding Balance of the
Personal Finance as at the date of death, according to the amortisation schedule set in force on the Entry Date.
If the date of death corresponds to the due date of one instalment, it is considered that this instalment is not yet paid. The Takaful Company cannot
be liable for more than the Outstanding Balance of the Personal Finance defined in the Personal Finance documentations / agreement(s) in force
when the Personal Finance was executed, irrespective of possible changes brought to the instalments later.
Permanent Total Disability (PTD) Benefit
If an Participant becomes Permanently and Totally Disabled as defined in this policy, the Takaful Company will terminate the insurance on the life
of such Participant and in lieu of all other benefits, will pay to the Policyholder in one lump sum 100% of the Outstanding Balance of the Personal
Finance as at the date of recognition of the state of PTD, according to the amortisation schedule set in force on the Entry date.
Payments in arrears and interests give no right to any benefit.
If the date of recognition of the state of PTD corresponds to the due date of one instalment, it is considered that this instalment is not yet paid. The
Takaful Company cannot be liable for more than the outstanding balance of the Personal Finance defined in the Personal Finance agreement in force
when the Personal Finance was granted, irrespective of possible changes brought to the instalments later.
Such state of PTD shall be exclusively recognized by a physician specially authorized by the Takaful Company according to the definitions and
provisions of this Policy.
There must be at least 6 continuous months elapsed from the commencement of Total Disability before it can be recognized as being Permanent.
Additionally, the Participant shall have to provide the Takaful Company with the evidence that he was carrying an officially registered occupation on
the commencement of his Total Disability.
PTD is subject to a deferral of coverage period of 90 days from the Good Health Declaration sign off date for PTD Coverage. A PTD claim
shall be automatically turned down if the PTD occurs within these 90 days.
SUMMARY OF POLICY EXCLUSIONS
Any Death caused by or resulting, directly or indirectly, wholly or partly, from any of the following factors will not be covered by this Takaful
Coverage:
1. Attempted suicide or any act of intentional self injury whilst sane or insane;
2. Taking part in a criminal act;
3. Sexually transmissible diseases, AIDS or the presence of any human immunodeficiency virus or any antibodies to such virus limited to:
a. sexually transmissible diseases due to illegal relationship
b. sexually transmissible diseases due to illegal blood transfusion
c. AIDS due to drug taking
4. Radioactivity and nuclear reactions: In no event will this retakaful agreement provides coverage for loss, damage, cost or expense directly or
 indirectly caused by, contributed to by, resulting from, or arising out of or in connection with biological, chemical, or nuclear explosion, pollution,
 contamination and/or fire following thereon, and release of weapon of mass destruction that do not involve an explosive sequence.
Also excluded hereon is any loss or expense of whatsoever nature directly or indirectly caused by, resulting from or in connection with any action
taken in controlling, preventing, or suppressing any, or all, of the above. In the event any portion of these exclusions is found to be invalid or
unenforceable, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect. 
5. Worldwide Terrorism Exclusion Clause: Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary within this Agreement and/or underlying agreements and
 or endorsements thereto, including express or implied obligations to “follow the settlements”, “follow the fortunes” or similar, it is hereby
 understood and agreed that all loss, liability, damage, costs, expenses, or legal expenses of whatsoever nature directly or indirectly caused by,
 resulting from, or in any way connected with or arising out of any Act of Terrorism regardless of any other cause or event contributing
 concurrently or in any other sequence to the loss is entirely excluded from this Agreement.
Act of Terrorism includes any act, or preparation in respect of action, including but not limited to the use of force or violence and/or the threat
thereof, of any person(s) or group(s) of persons whether acting alone or on behalf of or in connection with any organisation(s) or government(s),
committed for political, religious, ideological or similar purposes including but not limited to:
a. the intention to influence or affect the conduct of any government (de jure or de facto); and/or
b. to put the public, or any section of the public in fear; and/or
c. to commit violence or threaten violence against one or more persons (whether legal or natural); and/or
d. damaging tangible or intangible property; and/or
e. endangering life; and/or
f. creating a risk to the health or safety of the public or a section of the public; and/or
g. an act designed to interfere with or disrupt an electronic system.
This endorsement also excludes loss, liability, damage, cost, expenses or legal expenses of whatsoever nature directly or indirectly resulting from,
caused by or in connection with any action or decision of a government agency or other entity to prevent, control, respond to or terminate or in
any other way relating to actual or alleged Acts of Terrorism. Such loss, liability or damage is excluded regardless of any other cause or event that
contributes concurrently or in any sequence to the loss, liability or damage.
In the event that any portion of this endorsement is found to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
6. War and Civil War Exclusion Clause: Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary within this Agreement or any endorsement thereto including
 express or implied obligations to “follow the settlements”, “follow the fortunes” or similar, it is agreed that this reinsurance entirely excludes loss,
 liability damage, cost or expense, including expense costs, of whatsoever nature directly or indirectly caused by, resulting from or in connection
 with any of the following regardless of any other cause or event contributing concurrently or in any other sequence to the loss:
a. War, civil war, war-like operations (whether war be declared or not), hostilities, invasion, acts of a foreign enemy, mutiny, strikes, riots, civil
 commotion, assuming proportions of or amounting to a popular rising, military rising, insurrection, rebellion, revolution, military or usurped
 power, malicious damage, martial law.
b. Any action taken in controlling, preventing, suppressing or in any way relating to the excluded situations in (1) above, including, but not
 limited to, confiscation, nationalization, damage to or destruction of property.
In the event any portion of this endorsement is found to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
7. Total Asbestos Exclusion: It is hereby understood and agreed that this agreement shall not apply to and does not cover any loss or damage
 or actual or alleged liability whatsoever for any claim or claims in respect of loss or losses directly or indirectly arising out of, resulting from or in
 consequence of asbestos, in whatever form or quantity
8. Extra – contractual Obligations, for example ex - gratia payments.
TERMINATION OF INDIVIDUAL TAKAFUL COVERAGE
INSURANCE REFUNDS
The insurance of an individual shall automatically terminate upon the happening of any of the events mentioned below, whichever takes place
earlier:
1. The Participant attains age 65 for Death & PTD;
2. Upon of a Death claim or payment of a PTD claim;
3. Upon settlement by the Participant of the amount of the Personal Finance; or
4. Upon cancellation by the Policyholder of the Personal Finance agreement of the Participant, regardless of the reason.
GOVERNING LAW
The provisions and terms of this policy shall be construed in accordance with the laws applicable in the Kingdom of Bahrain and the Kingdom of
The participant shall receive prorated insurance premium refunds in case the loan is settled early. The prorated refund account is based on the terms
agreed between the Bank and the Takaful Provider.
Bahrain courts shall have the sole jurisdiction in respect of any controversy / dispute arising there from.
How to Get a Loan Without Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI)
For many individuals and families who are looking at purchasing a home, or any other real estate, private mortgage insurance (PMI) can be a major cost factor. This kind of insurance is expensive and doesn't really help the borrower insure anything. Rather, it's a general requirement imposed on property sales by the lender. Buyers have options when it comes to private mortgage insurance, but not all consumers understand how this insurance works, and more home buyers just can't figure out their own specific requirements. Here are some basic steps for getting rid of this burdensome insurance element.
Learn about the use of private mortgage insurance. As mentioned, this insurance policy really protects the lender. It's just a way of further ensuring that the borrower will not default on the loan. Since most serious home buyers have already done the research to make sure they will not have to default, PMI can be just another expensive extra when responsible buyers go to settlement. The first step in getting rid of PMI is to understand that in most cases, you don't need this coverage, and if you can get out of it, it generally works to your advantage.
CONSTRUCTION LOANS
IN THIS ARTICLE
One-Time-Close Construction Loans
Two-Time-Close Construction Loans
Construction Loan Details
Finding the Right Lender
Getting Pre-Approved
Applying for a Construction Loan
Financing for Owner-Builders        View all FINANCE articles
Unless you are paying cash for your project, you will need a construction loan to pay for the materials and labor, and you can use it to buy the land as well. Construction loans are a little more complicated than conventional mortgage loans because you are borrowing money on something that doesn’t yet exist. The bank wants assurances that you (and your contractor if you are hiring one) can get the house built on time and on budget.
If you are converting the construction loan to a mortgage when the building is completed, the bank also wants to know that the finished building plus land will have a high enough appraised value to support the mortgage. Because the lender needs to know the story behind the project, and believe that you can make it happen, construction loans are sometimes referred to as “story loans.” There are many variations on these types of loans from lender to lender, and they change frequently, so you should talk to a few different lenders to see what plan is best for you.
Two types of construction loans. The two basic types of construction loans used by homeowners are one-time-close loans, and two-time-close loans. In all construction loans, money is disbursed by the lender based on a pre-established draw schedule, so much money upon completion of the foundation, so much upon completion of the rough frame, and so on. The goal is to only pay for what has been completed, minus retainage, typically 10% of the cost of the project, which is held back until everything is completed properly and the owner is issued a certificate of occupancy (CO).
ONE-TIME-CLOSE CONSTRUCTION LOANS
These are the most popular type of construction loan for consumers, but are now difficult to find in some areas. Also called all-in-one loans or construction-to-permanent loans, these wrap the construction loan and the mortgage on the completed project into a single loan. The loan has one approval process, and one closing, simplifying the process and reducing the closing costs. Within this basic structure, there are several variations. Many charge a higher rate for the construction loan than the permanent financing. Typically, the borrower can choose from the portfolio of mortgages offered by the lender such as 30-year-fixed, or various ARM’s (adjustable rate mortgages). Some banks will let you lock in a fixed rate with a “float-down” option allowing you to get a lower rate if rates have fallen, for a fee of course. There may be penalties if the construction phase of the loan exceeds 12 months.
Paying a slightly higher rate on the construction phase of the loan is usually not significant, since the loan is short-term. For example, paying a extra 0.5 percent on a $200,000 construction loan over six months, would only add no more than $250 to your borrowing costs.
Construction loans are typically interest-only and you will pay only on the money that has been disbursed. So your loan payments grow as progress is made and more money is released. When the home is completed, the total amount borrowed during the construction loan automatically converts to a permanent mortgage. If you locked in a fixed mortgage rate at closing, but rates have since fallen, you can lower your mortgage rate by paying a fee – if your loan has a float-down option, a feature you will probably want on a fixed rate loan. If you had chosen a variable rate, pegged to the prime or another benchmark, then you will have to pay the current rate at the time the mortgage converts.
If interest rates are stable or rising, locking in the rate at closing makes sense. If rates are falling, a floating rate would be better – at least in the short run. If you have no idea which way rates are headed, a locked rate with a float-down provision may be your best bet.
Pros of one-time-close construction loans:
You pay just one set of closing costs.
You are approved at the same time for both construction and permanent financing.
Multiple options for permanent financing give you flexibility.
Cons of one-time-close construction loans:
If you spend more than the construction mortgage, you may need to take out a second loan, and pay additional closing costs.
Permanent rates may be a little higher than with a two-time-close loan.
TWO-TIME-CLOSE CONSTRUCTION LOANS 
A two-time-close loan is actually two separate loans – a short-term loan for the construction phase, and then a separate permanent mortgage loan on the completed project. Essentially, you are refinancing when the building is complete and need to get approved and pay closing costs all over again. During the construction phase, you will pay only interest on the money that has been paid out, so your payments will be small, but increase as more money is disbursed. There may be a maximum duration for the loan, such as  12-month, after which penalties kick in.
Because of two loan settlements, closing costs will be greater for this type of loan. However, you may get a better rate on the permanent mortgage as you will be working with mortgage refinance rates, which are typically more competitive than the rates offered in one-time-close loans. While it is easiest to stick with the same lender for the permanent financing, in most cases you will be free to shop around to make sure you are getting the best rate and terms. Also, you will not be locked into a fixed loan amount, and will be able to borrow more if you have added upgrades to the project and increased its value (assuming you qualify for the larger loan).
Pros of a two-time-close loan
Greater flexibility to increase loan amount during project.
Mortgage rates are often lower than in one-time-close loans.
You are usually free to shop around for permanent financing.
Cons of a two-time-close loan
Need to be approved twice and pay closing costs twice.
If you don’t get approved for permanent financing, you could face foreclosure.
CONSTRUCTION LOAN DETAILS
Construction loans are essentially a short-term line of credit extended to you to get your house built. If you don’t use all the money, you only pay interest for the money borrowed.  If you’ll be taking out a construction loan, your total loan expense needs to cover both hard and soft costs. A typical breakdown is shown below:
Typical Construction Loan Breakdown
Land cost	$100,000
Hard Construction Costs	$250,000
Soft Costs: Plans, permits, fees	$20,000
Closing Costs: Loan fees, title, escrow, inspections, appraisal, etc.	$4,500
Contingency Reserve(5% of hard costs)	$12,500
Interest Reserve	$8,000
Total Project Cost	$395,000
Appraised Value(completed project)	$475,000
Downpayment	$55,000
Loan Amount	$340,000
 
Owner’s equity. With construction loans, banks want the borrower to have some “skin in the game” in the form of owner’s equity. If you are borrowing on the land as well as the construction, you will need to make a substantial down payment of 20% to 25% on the land purchased, and then the bank will typically loan 80% or more of the construction costs, as long as the total loan does not exceed 75% or 80% of the value of the completed project. The land is assumed to account for 25% to 33% of the value of the completed project.  If you already own the land, then the land will count as equity in the project, and you may be able to borrow 100% of the construction cost.
Contingency provision. Since many projects exceed the loan amount, loans often have a built-in contingency of 5% to 10% over the estimated cost. To access this money, you may need documentation in the form of a change order, describing the additional work or more expensive materials chosen and the resulting upcharge. Some banks, however, will not pay for changes with or without a change order.
Interest reserve. Another peculiarity of construction loans is that most people make no payments at all during the construction phase. Assuming that you don’t have extra cash in your pocket during construction, most loans include an “interest reserve,” which is money lent to you to make the interest payments. The money is stored in an escrow account and paid back to the bank as interest. The interest is considered part of the cost of construction by your contractor, or by you as an owner-builder.
Draw schedule. In general, the lender does not want to disburse more money than the value of the completed work. Nor do you if you are hiring a general contractor. If the contractor has completed $50,000 worth of work and has been paid $75,000, neither you or the bank are likely to recoup the difference if the builder leaves town, goes bankrupt, or for whatever reason does not complete the job. For that reason, you and the bank will need to establish a draw schedule based on the value of each phase of the work, called a schedule of values.
If you are not borrowing money, you will still need to establish a draw schedule with your contractor so that you don’t get ahead of the work completed. It’s not your job to play banker and provide your contractor with working capital or extra spending money. However, it’s reasonable for the contractor to ask for money to cover the deposit on special-order items. If you are putting up a lot of money, it’s best to put the orders in your name. If anything goes wrong along the way, at least you’ll own the 20 high-end windows you’ve paid for.
Insurance. You construction loan will also require that you or your contractor carry General Liability Insurance, covering any harm to people (non-workers) or property caused during the construction process, and  Builders Risk insurance, which covers damage to the unfinished building. The loan — and the law – will also require that your contractor carry Worker’s Comp Insurance if he has any employees. If the contractor does not carry the proper insurance, then you, the owner, can be sued by an injured employee or neighbor whose child is hurt while playing in the unfinished home. You should also ask the contractor list you and your family as “additional insured” on his liability policy.
Typically, the homeowner buys the Builder’s Risk policy, which may convert to homeowner’s insurance when the building is complete. In a renovation, your homeowner’s policy may already include this coverage, or it can be added as a rider.  If your builder does not carry liability insurance, you will need to purchase this on your own before closing on a loan.  Don’t hesitate to ask the contractor why he does not carry full insurance, and reconsider whether this is the person you want to build or remodel your home. You may find it easier to get a loan (and sleep at night) with a fully insured contractor. Talk to your insurance agent about your potential liability and how to protect yourself before getting too far along.
FINDING THE RIGHT LENDER 
Most construction loans are issue by banks, not mortgage companies, as the loans are typically held by the bank until the building is complete. Since construction loans are more complicated and variable than mortgages, you will want to work with a lender experienced in these loans. And given that not all banks offer all types of construction loans, you should talk to at least a few different banks to see what is available in your community.
You can learn a lot by listening to the lenders’ policies on draw schedules, inspection and payment procedures, and qualification rules, which will vary from bank to bank. Also banks can be a big help in creating a realistic budget for your project – the biggest challenge for most homeowners (as well as many contractors).  Following the bank’s budgeting format can help you with cost control and can also help you obtain a loan from that bank.
Some banks use loan officers employed by the bank, while others work primarily with independent loan officers. In either case, you want a loan officer experienced in construction loans and one who will walk you through the process and protect your best interests.
In most case the loan officers get paid on commission when they release funds. So there is a potential conflict of interest if the loan officer wants to release funds at the end of project and you want the funds withheld until problems are corrected. Even though payments are generally based on physical inspections of the work done, the inspectors are simply looking to see if the work has been completed, not at its quality.
Also different lenders have different policies around construction loans. For example, if you have a mortgage on your current home that you are selling, some lenders will not count that against your borrowing limits. Otherwise you may need to sell your first house before you can obtain a construction mortgage to build your new home.
Different lenders will also offer different rates. Naturally you will also want the best rates and terms available. If the bank you have dealt with for many years is a little higher than a bank you have less confidence in, tell your local bank you’d like to work with them – but can they do a little better on the rate to match their competitor. Since all banks borrow their money at the same rate, they can all lend at the same rate.
GETTING PRE-APPROVED 
Before getting too far ahead with your plans to buy land and build, or to undertake a major remodeling project, it makes sense to find out how much you can borrow. Conversely, once you know you’re borrowing limits, you can tailor your design to your budget realities. You can meet with a loan officer to just gather information, or to get pre-approved if you plan to start the project soon. Pre-approvals typically last for 30 to 90 days, depending on the lender.
Otherwise, you can waste a lot of time and money designing your dream project, only to find that it is not even in the ball park of what you can afford. And once you are in the ballpark, you will still need to make a number of trade-offs during the design process to keep within the budget (9-ft. ceilings vs. better windows, jetted tub vs. tile floor; etc.). Knowing what you can afford will help you make better decisions. You may decide that you want to add inexpensive unfinished space now, such as attic or basement, that you can finish later when you’re a little more flush.
The specific requirements to obtain a loan change from time to time and vary among lenders. but all lenders look at the same three factors: your credit score (FICO), your income-to-debt ratio, and how much equity you will be putting into the project. The higher your credit score and down payment the better your chances are for approval. If you already own the land, you’re in pretty good shape given the high cost of land these days relative to construction costs.
Income-to-debt ratio. The income-to-debt ratio limits how much of your monthly income you can use to pay off debts. Banks look at two numbers: the “front ratio” is the percentage of your monthly gross income (pre-tax) used to pay your monthly debts. The “back ratio” is the same thing but includes your consumer debt. This is expressed as 33/38, typical bank requirements for the front and back ratios.  FHA accepts up to 29/41 for front and back ratios, while the VA accepts a 41 back ratio, but has no guideline for the front ratio.
Equity. Except in the bad old days of the nothing-down, “no-doc” mortgages that helped spawn the financial collapse of 2008, lenders want the borrower to have some “skin in the game.” The more money you have in a project, the less likely you are to default or not complete the project. On construction loans, most lenders today will only loan you 75% of the appraised value of the home, based on the plans and specs. This is called the “Subject to Completion Appraisal,” done by the bank. If you already own the land, you will probably have no problem with this equity contribution, since land costs have risen much faster than construction costs in most areas and usually account for a large share of the total project cost.
APPLYING FOR A CONSTRUCTION LOAN
If you’ve been pre-approved, the building appraises within the lending limits, and you show up with full documentation and a reputable contractor, you should no problem obtaining the loan. If you are an owner-builder, you will have the additional task of convincing the lender that you can get the project completed on time and on budget. The more cost documentation you bring the better since cost overruns (or underestimates) are the number-one problem with inexperienced builders. Hiring a construction manager  may help you put together a credible package and secure the loan.
To apply for a loan, you’ll need the following, in addition to the standard financial information required for any bank loan:
Building lot details: a deed or offer to purchase,  documentation of protective covenants and other deed restrictions
A clear description of responsibilities of the architect (if any), and the general contractor, construction manager, or yourself if you are an owner-builder.
The builder’s resume, insurance certificates, and credit and banking references
Complete set of blueprints and specifications
Material’s list in the bank’s format
Line-item budget (schedule of values)  in the bank’s format
A draw schedule (payment schedule) consistent with the lender’s disbursement procedures.
A signed construction contract, including start and completion dates, and provisions for change orders
FINANCING FOR OWNER BUILDERS
It is often difficult for owner builders to get construction loans. Since you are being loaned money for something that does not yet exist, you need to convince the bank that can get the job done on time and on budget. They key to this is approaching the bank the same way a contractor would – with professional plans and specs, a detailed estimate, and a proposed construction schedule. You may consider hiring a construction manager, estimator, or other building consultant to help put your package together.
An accurate estimate is essential, since the bank will assign an appraiser to determine the value of your project. If it looks like your estimate is overly optimistic and the bank does not think you can really get the project built for the loan amount, you will either need to borrow more (if you qualify), add more cash to the deal, or scale back elements of the design.
Many building projects come in over budget, and it’s the rare job that comes in under.  An owner-builder’s (or inexperienced contractor’s)  lack of experience can often lead to important items being overlooked in the estimate. Or the project may incur extra costs through design or construction errors, inefficiency, hidden problems, or changes to the plans or specs during the project. A bank wants protection against these uncertainties, so they may want more of your cash in the project as well as evidence that you are well-organized and have done thorough planning in the plans, specs, and budgets. Of course, you don’t want to be surprised any more than the bank does, so make sure you do your homework. Have the house completely designed, built, and paid for on paper before you start borrowing and digging.
Formal contract-document issued by an insurance company to an insured. It (1) puts an indemnity cover into effect, (2) serves as a legal evidence of the insurance agreement, (3) sets out the exact terms on which the indemnity cover has been provided, and (4) states associated information such as the (a) specific risks and perils covered, (b) duration of coverage, (c) amount of premium, (d) mode of premium payment, and (e) deductibles, if any.
5 Insurance Policies Everyone Should Have
Protecting your most important assets is an important step in creating a solid personal financial plan. The right insurance policies will go a long way toward helping you safeguard your earning power and your possessions. In this article, we'll show you five policies that you shouldn't do without. (To find out about some insurance basics, see Understand Your Insurance Contract.)

TUTORIAL: Intro To Insurance

Long-Term Disability Insurance
The prospect of long-term disability is so frightening that some people simply choose to ignore it. While we all hope that, "nothing will happen to me," relying on hope to protect your future earning power is simply not a good idea. Instead, choose a disability policy that provides enough coverage to enable you to continue your current lifestyle, even if you can no longer continue working. (Protecting Your Income Source provides a closer look at this important topic.)

Life Insurance
Life insurance protects the people that are financially dependent on you. If your parents, spouse, children or other loved ones would face financial hardship if you died, life insurance should be high on your list of required insurance policies. Think about how much you earn each year (and the number of years you plan to remain employed), and purchase a policy that will replace that income in the event of your untimely demise. Factor in the cost of burial, too, as the unexpected cost is a burden for many families. (For a more detailed look at the types of coverage available and factors involved in choosing the right coverage for your situation, read Buying Life Insurance: Term Versus Permanent and How Much Life Insurance Should You Carry?)

Health Insurance
The soaring cost of medical care is reason enough to make health insurance a necessity. Even a simple visit to the family doctor can result in a hefty bill. More serious injuries, that result in a hospital stay, can generate a bill that tops the price of a one-week stay at a luxury resort. Injuries that require surgery can quickly rack up five-figure costs. Although the ever-increasing cost of health insurance is a financial burden, for just about everyone, the potential cost of not having coverage is much higher. (For more insight, see Fighting The High Costs Of Healthcare.)


Homeowners Insurance
Replacing your home is an expensive proposition. Having the right homeowners insurance can make the process less difficult. When shopping for a policy, look for one that covers replacement of the structure and the contents in addition to the cost of living somewhere else while your home is repaired. (To keep reading on this subject, see Insurance Tips For Homeowners.)

Keep in mind that the cost of rebuilding doesn't need to include the cost of the land, since you already own it. Depending on the age of your home, and the amenities that it contains, the cost to replace it could be more or less than the price you paid for it. To get an accurate estimate, find out how much local builders charge per square foot and multiply that number by the amount of space you will need to replace. Don't forget to factor in the cost of upgrades and special features. Also, be sure the policy provides adequate coverage for the cost of any liability for injuries that might occur on your property.

Automobile Insurance
Some level of automobile insurance is required by law in most places. Even if you are not required to have it, and you are driving an old clunker that has been paid off for years, automobile insurance is something you shouldn't skip. If you are involved in an accident, and someone is injured or their property is damaged, you could be subject to a lawsuit that could possibly cost you everything you own. Accidents happen quickly and the results are often tragic. Having no automobile insurance or purchasing only the minimum required coverage saves you only a tiny amount of money, and puts everything else that you own at risk. (To learn more, see Shopping For Car Insurance.)

*Bonus Tip For Business Owners: In addition to the policies listed above, business owners need business insurance. Liability coverage in a litigation-happy society could be the difference between a long, prosperous endeavor and a trip to bankruptcy court.

Shop Carefully
Insurance policies come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes and boast many different features, benefits and prices. Shop carefully, read the policies and talk to the agent to be certain that you understand the coverage and the cost. Make sure the policies that you purchase are adequate for your needs, and don't sign on the dotted line until you are happy with the purchase.
15 Insurance Policies You Don't Need
Fear of the future sells insurance. Because we can't predict the future, we want to be ready to cover our financial needs if, or when, something bad happens. Insurance companies understand this fear and offer a variety of insurance policies designed to protect us from a host of calamities that range from disability to disease and everything in between. While none of us wants anything bad to happen, many of the potential catastrophes that happen in our lives are not worth insuring against. In this article, we'll take you through 15 policies that you're probably better off without. (To learn about the basics of insurance, see Understand Your Insurance Contract and Exploring Advanced Insurance Contract Fundamentals.)

1. Private Mortgage Insurance
The infamous private mortgage insurance (PMI) is well known to homeowners because it increases the amount of their monthly mortgage payments. PMI is an insurance policy that protects the lender against loss when lending to a higher-risk borrower. The borrower pays for this insurance but derives no benefit. Fortunately, there are several ways to avoid paying for this unnecessary policy. PMI is required if you purchase a home with a down payment of less than 20% of the home's value. The small down payment is viewed as putting you at risk of defaulting on the loan. Put down at least 20% and the PMI requirement goes away. Alternatively, you can put down 10% and take out two loans, one for 80% of the sale price of the property and one for 10%, although interests rates can prevent the economics of this maneuver from working out in the homeowner's favor. (To read more about mortgages, see Understanding the Mortgage Payment Structure, To Rent or Buy? The Financial Issues - Part 1 and Part 2.)

2. Extended Warranties
Extended warranties are available on a host of appliances and electronics. From a consumer's perspective, they are rarely used, particularly on small items such as DVD players and radios. If you purchase a reputable, brand-name product, you can be fairly certain it will work as advertised and that the extended warranty is statistically likely to be unnecessary. If you spend $5,000 on a giant, flat-screen television, the policy is still unlikely to pay off, but might make you feel better. For everything else, forget it. (To learn more, read Extended Warranties: Should You Take The Bait?)

3. Automobile Collision
Collision insurance is designed to cover the cost of repairs to your vehicle if you are involved in an accident. If you have a loan out on the car, the loan issuer is likely to require that you have collision insurance. If your car is paid off, collision is optional; therefore, if you have enough money in the bank to cover the cost of a new car, collision insurance may be an unnecessary expense. This is particularly true if you are driving an old car, because cars depreciate so quickly that many vehicles are worth only a fraction of their purchase price by the time the loan is paid in full. (To find out more about car insurance, read Shopping For Car Insurance.)

4. Rental Car Insurance
Most auto insurance policies offer additional coverage for the cost of car rentals, touting it as a useful feature if your car is ever involved in an accident and needs to spend some time in the repair shop. This may sound like a good idea, but in reality, most people rarely rent a car, and when they do, the cost is relatively low and hardly worth insuring against. Although rental car insurance is relatively inexpensive, amortized over the course of a lifetime you are still likely to spend far more than you will benefit.


5. Car Rental Damage Insurance
Many auto insurance policies already cover rentals, so there's no need to pay for this twice. Check your policy before you pay. Depending on where you rent the vehicle, you may also be able to pay a small fee for insurance on your rental when you pick it up at the rental center. If this fee is less than what you'd pay for a year in your old policy, choose the fee over the policy. (To read more, see Travel Tips For Keeping You And Your Money Safe.)

6. Flight Insurance
Flight insurance coverage is completely unnecessary. Despite media portrayal, airline accidents are relatively rare, and your life insurance policy should already provide coverage in the event of a catastrophe. (For more information on life insurance, see How Much Life Insurance Should You Carry?, Life Insurance Distribution And Benefits and Life Insurance Clauses Determine Your Coverage.)

7. Water Line Coverage
Water companies have made an aggressive push to sell policies that cover the repair of the water line that runs from the street to your house. The odds are in your favor that you will never use this coverage, particularly if you live in a newer home. If you live an average suburban neighborhood and you do need to repair the water line, the distance to the street is short, the likelihood of a problem is low and repair costs are a few thousand dollars or less. The same goes for policies offered by other utility companies.

8. Life Insurance for Children
Life insurance is designed to provide a safety net for your heirs/dependents. Because children don't have heirs to worry about and, statistically speaking, most kids will grow up safe and healthy, most parents should not purchase life insurance for their kids. Instead, use the money that you would have spent on life insurance to fund an education plan or an individual retirement account (IRA). (To read more on saving money for your kids, see Investing In Your Child's Education, Teaching Your Child To Be Financially Savvy and Don't Forget The Kids: Save For Their Education And Retirement.)

9. Flood Insurance
Unless you live in a flood plain or an area with a history of water problems, don't even bother buying flood insurance. If none of the homes in the area has ever been flooded, yours is unlikely to be the first.

10. Credit Card Insurance
Purchasing coverage to pay your credit card bill in the event you cannot pay it is a waste of money. A far better idea is to avoid running up your credit cards in the first place, so you won't need to worry about the bills. Not only do you not save on the insurance premiums, you'll also save the interest on your debt. (To learn more about credit, see Take Control Of Your Credit Cards, Credit, Debit And Charge: Sizing Up The Cards In Your Wallet and Understanding Credit Card Interest.)

11. Credit Card Loss Insurance
Federal law limits your liability if your credit card is stolen. Your out-of-pocket costs are limited to $50 per card and not a penny more. In fact, many credit card companies don't even try to collect the $50.

12. Mortgage Life Insurance
Mortgage life insurance pays off your house in the event of your death. Rather than add another policy - and another bill - to your list of insurance plans, it makes more sense to get a term-life policy instead. A good life insurance policy will provide enough money to pay off the mortgage and to cover other expenses as well. After all, the mortgage isn't the only bill your survivors will need to pay. (To read more, see Buying Life Insurance: Term Versus Permanent.)

13. Unemployment Insurance
This coverage makes minimum payments on your bills if you are out of work, which sounds like an attractive proposition. A better plan is to save your money and build up an emergency fund instead. You won't have to cover the cost of the insurance policy and, if you are never out of work, you won't spend any money at all. (Find out how to create an emergency fund in Build Yourself An Emergency Fund.)

14. Disease Insurance
Policies are available to cover cancer, heart disease and other maladies. Instead of trying to identify every possible disease that you may encounter, get a good medical coverage policy instead. This way, your medical bills will be covered regardless of the problem you face. (For related reading, see Fighting The High Costs Of Healthcare.)

15. Accidental-Death Insurance
Unless you are extraordinarily accident prone, an accident is unlikely. Major catastrophes such as car wrecks and fires are covered under other policies, as is any harm that comes to you while at work. Accidental-death policies are often fraught with stipulations that make them difficult to collect on, so skip the hassles and get life insurance instead.

When Choosing Insurance
There are so many policies to chose from, and they all cost money. While a certain amount of insurance coverage is necessary and prudent, you need to choose carefully. In general, broad policies that offer coverage for a multitude of potential events are a better choice than limited-scope policies that focus on specific diseases or potential incidents. Before you buy any policy, read it carefully to make sure that you understand the terms, coverage and costs. Don't sign on the dotted line until you are comfortable with the coverage and are sure that you need it.
Umbrella Insurance Policy
DEFINITION OF 'UMBRELLA INSURANCE POLICY'
Extra liability insurance coverage that goes beyond the limits of the insured's home, auto or watercraft insurance. It provides an additional layer of security to those who are at risk for being sued for damages to other people's property or injuries caused to others in an accident. It also protects against libel, vandalism, slander and invasion of privacy. An umbrella insurance policy is very helpful when the insurance owner is sued and the dollar limit of the original policy has been exhausted. The added coverage provided by liability insurance is most useful to individuals who own a lot of assets or very expensive assets and are at significant risk for being sued.

INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'UMBRELLA INSURANCE POLICY'
The premium for an umbrella insurance policy may be less expensive if the policy is purchased from the same insurer that provided the original auto, home or watercraft insurance. Depending on the provider, the policyholder who wants to add umbrella insurance policy is required to have a base insurance coverage of $150,000 to $250,000 for auto insurance and $250,000 to $300,000 for homeowners insurance. 
Vehicle Insurance in Hungary
General information on taking out an insurance policy in Hungary, with comprehensive details on insuring a vehicle (options from third party to all risks) and making a claim...

In Hungary, it is the car and not the driver that is insured, although some policies have restrictions on the age of drivers, and the policy holder’s age, gender and marital status influence the price.

Only cars registered in Hungary can get insurance in Hungary, and third party liability auto insurance (kötelezo feleloség biztosítás) is obligatory. The proof of payment - bank transfer or yellow postal cheque receipt (sárga csekk) - must be carried in the vehicle at all times, together with the car’s registration papers (forgalmi igazolvány).

There are also other kinds of insurance available. For example, comprehensive insurance (CASCO) is usually for new or financed cars.

Types of Insurance
There are two main types of insurance in Hungary:

Third party liability auto insurance (kötelezo feleloség biztosítás)
Comprehensive insurance (CASCO). Insurance companies offer several kinds of comprehensive insurance from basic insurance which is called mini-CASCO to teljes-CASCO, which is a fully comprehensive policy
Car Insurance
The cost of vehicle insurance varies from one insurance company to another. Cars are insured for one year and it is advisable to shop around or to use an insurance broker. There is a 30 percent accident tax added to third party insurance which is collected by the insurance company and forwarded to the state.

The cost of vehicle insurance depends on the following factors:

Make and model of the vehicle, its power and age, and occasionally, its colour
Driving history and age of the driver(s)
If there are small children in the family
Where the car is registered (town or countryside)
Some insurance companies give discounts for various memberships or multiple insurance. Other companies give discounts for direct debit or bulk payment.

Bonus-Malus system
Hungarian car insurance has a system of no-claims discounts, known as the Bonus-Malus system, which is regulated by the state. The annual rate increases if a claim is made when an accident is the driver's fault. However, if the driver does not have an accident, the rate decreases.

All new drivers start at a premium level, which is called "A00". If they have been insured in the previous two years they can transfer their previous bonus.

A no-claims bonus accumulated abroad can be transferred to a Hungarian insurance company. The certificate issued by the previous insurance company is needed, and maybe a translation. English-, German- and French-language certificates are usually accepted, but it is advisable to check with the insurance company first.

Making a Claim
In the event of an accident, the Accident Report Form (Kárbejelento lap) should be sent to the insurance company within a limited time, which differs from one company to another. It is usually five days for the driver responsible and 15 for the victim.

The Green Card
An international motor insurance green card, which is needed when travelling abroad to prove that a car is insured, is sent by post by the insurance company.

Cancelling or Transferring a Car Insurance Contract
Insurance contracts are automatically renewed at expiry date, unless they are cancelled in writing 30 days previously. It is advisable to shop around each year to benefit from discounts.
Vehicle insurance (also known as, GAP insurance, car insurance, or motor insurance) is insurance purchased for cars, trucks, motorcycles, and other road vehicles. Its primary use is to provide financial protection against physical damage and/or bodily injury resulting from traffic collisions and against liability that could also arise there from the specific terms of vehicle insurance vary with legal regulations in each region. To a lesser degree vehicle insurance may additionally offer financial protection against theft of the vehicle and possibly damage to the vehicle, sustained from things other than traffic collisions.

Contents  [hide] 
1 History
2 Public policies
2.1 Australia
2.2 Canada
2.3 Germany
2.4 Hungary
2.5 Indonesia
2.6 India
2.7 Ireland
2.8 New Zealand
2.9 Norway
2.10 Romania
2.11 South Africa
2.12 United Arab Emirates
2.13 United Kingdom
2.13.1 Investigation into repair costs & fraudulent claims
2.14 United States
3 Coverage levels
4 Excess
4.1 Compulsory excess
4.2 Voluntary excess
5 Basis of premium charges
5.1 Gender
5.2 Age
5.3 U.S. driving history
5.4 Marital status
5.5 Vehicle classification
5.6 Distance
5.6.1 Reasonable distance estimation
5.6.2 Odometer-based systems
5.6.3 GPS-based system
5.6.4 OBDII-based system
5.7 Credit ratings
5.8 Behavior-based insurance
6 Repair insurance
7 See also
8 References
9 External links
History[edit]
Widespread use of the automobile began after the First World War in the cities. Cars were relatively fast and dangerous by that stage, yet there was still no compulsory form of car insurance anywhere in the world. This meant that injured victims would seldom get any compensation in an accident, and drivers often faced considerable costs for damage to their car and property.

A compulsory car insurance scheme was first introduced in the United Kingdom with the Road Traffic Act 1930. This ensured that all vehicle owners and drivers had to be insured for their liability for injury or death to third parties whilst their vehicle was being used on a public road.[citation needed] Germany enacted similar legislation in 1939.

Public policies[edit]
In many jurisdictions it is compulsory to have vehicle insurance before using or keeping a motor vehicle on public roads. Most jurisdictions relate insurance to both the car and the driver, however the degree of each varies greatly.

Several jurisdictions have experimented with a "pay-as-you-drive" insurance plan which is paid through a gasoline tax (petrol tax). This would address issues of uninsured motorists and also charge based on the miles (kilometers) driven, which could theoretically increase the efficiency of the insurance, through streamlined collection.[1]

Australia[edit]
In Australia CTP is a state based scheme and only covers personal injury liability.

Comprehensive and Third Party Property insurance is sold separately to cover property damage and cover can be for events such as fire, theft, collision and other property damage.

Third Party Property Insurance covers damage to someone else's property or vehicle, but not your own vehicle.

Third Party Property Insurance with Fire and Theft is the same as above, but will cover your vehicle in the event of fire or theft up to the value stated on the policy

Comprehensive Insurance covers damage to your own property or vehicle as well as someone else's.

CTP

Compulsory Third Party Personal Injury Insurance is commonly known as CTP insurance, and is linked to the registration of a vehicle. It travels with the vehicle ownership when a vehicle is sold and already registered. CTP insurance does not cover vehicle damage, it covers the vehicle owner and any person who drives the vehicle against claims for liability in respect of the death or injury to people caused by the fault of the owner or driver. It covers the cost of all reasonable medical treatment for injuries received in the accident, loss of wages, cost of care services and in some cases compensation for pain and suffering.

In New South Wales and the Northern Territory Compulsory Third Party Insurance (commonly known as CTP Insurance) is a mandatory requirement and each individual car must be insured when registered. A 'Greenslip,'[2] another name by which CTP Insurance is commonly known due to the colour of the form, must be obtained through one of the five licenced insurers in New South Wales. Suncorp and Allianz both hold two licences to issue CTP Greenslips – Suncorp under the GIO and AAMI licences and Allianz under the Allianz and CIC/Allianz licences. The remaining three licences to issue CTP Greenslips are held by QBE, Zurich and Insurance Australia Limited (NRMA). APIA and Shannons and InsureMyRide Insurance also supply CTP insurance licenced by GIO. In addition to the Greenslip, an additional car insurance can be purchased through insurers in Australia. This will cover claims that the standard CTP insurance cannot provide. This is known as a comprehensive car insurance.[citation needed]

A similar scheme applies in the Australian Capital Territory through AAMI, GIO and NRMA (IAL).

In Victoria, Third Party Personal insurance from the Transport Accident Commission is similarly included, through a levy, in the vehicle registration fee. A similar scheme exists in Tasmania through the Motor Accidents Insurance Board.

In Queensland, CTP is a mandatory part of registration for a vehicle. There is choice of insurer but price is government controlled in a tight band.

In South Australia, Third Party Personal insurance from the Motor Accident Commission is included in the licence registration fee for people over 17. A similar scheme applies in Western Australia.

Canada[edit]
Several Canadian provinces (British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Quebec) provide a public auto insurance system while in the rest of the country insurance is provided privately. Basic auto insurance is mandatory throughout Canada with each province's government determining which benefits are included as minimum required auto insurance coverage and which benefits are options available for those seeking additional coverage. Accident benefits coverage is mandatory everywhere except for Newfoundland and Labrador. All provinces in Canada have some form of no-fault insurance available to accident victims. The difference from province to province is the extent to which tort or no-fault is emphasized. International drivers entering Canada are permitted to drive any vehicle their licence allows for the 3-month period for which they are allowed to use their international licence. International laws provide visitors to the country with an International Insurance Bond (IIB) until this 3-month period is over in which the international driver must provide themselves with Canadian Insurance. The IIB is reinstated every time the international driver enters the country. Damage to the driver's own vehicle is optional – one notable exception to this is in Saskatchewan, where SGI provides collision coverage (less than a $1000 deductible, such as a collision damage waiver) as part of its basic insurance policy. In Saskatchewan, residents have the option to have their auto insurance through a tort system but less than 0.5% of the population have taken this option.[3]

Germany[edit]

International Motor Insurance Card (IVK)
Since 1939, it has been compulsory to have third party personal insurance before keeping a motor vehicle in all federal states of Germany. In addition, every vehicle owner is free to take out a comprehensive insurance policy. All types of car insurances are provided by several private insurers. The amount of insurance contribution is determined by several criteria, like the region, the type of car or the personal way of driving.[4]

The minimum coverage defined by German law for car liability insurance / third party personal insurance is: 7.5 million euro for bodily injury (damage to people), 1 million euro for property damage and 50,000 euro for financial/fortune loss which is in no direct or indirect coherence with bodily injury or property damage. Insurance companies usually offer all-in/combined single limit insurances of 50 Million Euro or 100 Million Euro (about 141 Million Dollar) for bodily injury, property damage and other financial/fortune loss (usually with a bodily injury coverage limitation of 8 to 15 million euro for EACH bodily injured person).

Hungary[edit]
Third-party vehicle insurance is mandatory for all vehicles in Hungary. No exemption is possible by money deposit. The premium covers all damage up to HUF 500M (about €1.8M) per accident without deductible. The coverage is extended to HUF 1,250M (about €4.5M) in case of personal injuries. Vehicle insurance policies from all EU-countries and some non-EU countries are valid in Hungary based on bilateral or multilateral agreements. Visitors with vehicle insurance not covered by such agreements are required to buy a monthly, renewable policy at the border.[5]

Indonesia[edit]
Third-party vehicle Insurance is a mandatory requirement in Indonesia and each individual car and motorcycle must be insured or the vehicle will not be considered legal. Therefore, a motorist cannot drive the vehicle until it is insured. Third Party vehicle insurance is included through a levy in the vehicle registration fee which is paid to government institution that known as "Samsat". Third-Party Vehicle Insurance is regulated under Act No. 34 Year 1964 Re: Road Traffic Accident Fund and merely covers Bodily injury, and managed by a SOE named PT. Jasa Raharja (Persero).[6]

India[edit]

A Sample Vehicle Insurance Certificate in India
Auto Insurance in India deals with the insurance covers for the loss or damage caused to the automobile or its parts due to natural and man-made calamities. It provides accident cover for individual owners of the vehicle while driving and also for passengers and third party legal liability. There are certain general insurance companies who also offer online insurance service for the vehicle.

Auto Insurance in India is a compulsory requirement for all new vehicles used whether for commercial or personal use. The insurance companies have tie-ups with leading automobile manufacturers. They offer their customers instant auto quotes. Auto premium is determined by a number of factors and the amount of premium increases with the rise in the price of the vehicle. The claims of the Auto Insurance in India can be accidental, theft claims or third party claims. Certain documents are required for claiming Auto Insurance in India, like duly signed claim form, RC copy of the vehicle, Driving license copy, FIR copy, Original estimate and policy copy.

There are different types of Auto Insurance in India :

Private Car Insurance – In the Auto Insurance in India, Private Car Insurance is the fastest growing sector as it is compulsory for all the new cars. The amount of premium depends on the make and value of the car, state where the car is registered and the year of manufacture.

Two Wheeler Insurance – The Two Wheeler Insurance under the Auto Insurance in India covers accidental insurance for the drivers of the vehicle. The amount of premium depends on the current showroom price multiplied by the depreciation rate fixed by the Tariff Advisory Committee at the time of the beginning of policy period.

Commercial Vehicle Insurance – Commercial Vehicle Insurance under the Auto Insurance in India provides cover for all the vehicles which are not used for personal purposes, like the Trucks and HMVs. The amount of premium depends on the showroom price of the vehicle at the commencement of the insurance period, make of the vehicle and the place of registration of the vehicle. The auto insurance generally includes:

Loss or damage by accident, fire, lightning, self ignition, external explosion, burglary, housebreaking or theft, malicious act.
Liability for third party injury/death, third party property and liability to paid driver
On payment of appropriate additional premium, loss/damage to electrical/electronic accessories
The auto insurance does not include:

Consequential loss, depreciation, mechanical and electrical breakdown, failure or breakage
When vehicle is used outside the geographical area
War or nuclear perils and drunken driving.
Ireland[edit]
The Road Traffic Act, 1933 requires all drivers of mechanically propelled vehicles in public places to have at least third-party insurance, or to have obtained exemption – generally by depositing a (large) sum of money with the High Court as a guarantee against claims. In 1933 this figure was set at £15,000.[7] The Road Traffic Act, 1961[8] (which is currently in force) repealed the 1933 act but replaced these sections with functionally identical sections.

From 1968, those making deposits require the consent of the Minister for Transport to do so, with the sum specified by the Minister.

Those not exempted from obtaining insurance must obtain a certificate of insurance from their insurance provider, and display a portion of this (an insurance disc) on their vehicles windscreen (if fitted). The certificate in full must be presented to a police station within ten days if requested by an officer. Proof of having insurance or an exemption must also be provided to pay for the motor tax.

Those injured or suffering property damage/loss due to uninsured drivers can claim against the Motor Insurance Bureau of Ireland's uninsured drivers fund, as can those injured (but not those suffering damage or loss) from hit and run offences.

New Zealand[edit]
Within New Zealand, the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) provides nationwide no-fault personal injury insurance.[9] Injuries involving motor vehicles operating on public roads are covered by the Motor Vehicle Account, for which premiums are collected through levies on petrol and through vehicle licensing fees.[10]

Norway[edit]
In Norway, the vehicle owner must provide the minimum of liability insurance for his vehicle(s) – of any kind. Otherwise, the vehicle is illegal to use. If a person drives a vehicle belonging to someone else, and has an accident, the insurance will cover for damage done.

Romania[edit]
Romanian law mandates Raspundere Auto Civila, a motor-vehicle liability insurance for all vehicle owners to cover damages to third parties.[11]

South Africa[edit]
South Africa allocates a percentage of the money from gasoline into the Road Accident Fund, which goes towards compensating third parties in accidents.[12][13]

United Arab Emirates[edit]
When buying car insurance in the United Arab Emirates, traffic department require a 13-month insurance certificate each time you register or renew a vehicle registration.

United Kingdom[edit]

Uninsured cars seized by Merseyside Police on display outside the force's headquarters in 2006
In 1930, the UK government introduced a law that required every person who used a vehicle on the road to have at least third-party personal injury insurance. Today, UK law is defined by the Road Traffic Act 1988,[14] which was last modified in 1991. The Act requires that motorists either be insured, have a security, or have made a specified deposit (£500,000 in 1991) with the Accountant General of the Supreme Court, against their liability for injuries to others (including passengers) and for damage to other persons' property, resulting from use of a vehicle on a public road or in other public places.

It is an offense to use a car, or allow others to use it, without the insurance that satisfies the act whilst on the public highway (or public place Section 143(1)(a) RTA 1988 as amended 1991); however, no such legislation applies on private land. Police have the power to seize vehicles that do not have the necessary insurance in place. A driver caught driving without the necessary insurance for that vehicle will be prosecuted by the police and will receive either a fixed penalty or magistrate courts penalty. If convicted the driver will receive an IN10 endorsement on their licence.[citation needed]

Road Traffic Act Only Insurance differs from Third Party Only Insurance (detailed below) and is not often sold. It provides the very minimum cover to satisfy the requirements of the Act. For example Road Traffic Act Only Insurance has a limit of £1,000,000 for damage to third party property – third party only insurance typically has a greater limit for third party property damage. As a result of costly claims, insurance companies can now no longer place a limit on the amount that they are liable for in the event of a claim by 3rd parties against a legitimate policy. This can be explained in part by the Great Heck Rail Crash that cost the insurers over £22 million in compensation for the fatalities and damage to property caused by the actions of the insured driver of a motor vehicle that caused the disaster.

The minimum level of insurance cover commonly available, and which satisfies the requirement of the Act, is called third party only insurance. The level of cover provided by Third party only insurance is basic, but does exceed the requirements of the act. This insurance covers any liability to third parties, but does not cover any other risks.

More commonly purchased is third party, fire and theft. This covers all third party liabilities and also covers the vehicle owner against the destruction of the vehicle by fire (whether malicious or due to a vehicle fault) and theft of the vehicle itself. It may or may not cover vandalism. This kind of insurance and the two preceding types do not cover damage to the vehicle caused by the driver or other hazards.

Comprehensive insurance covers all of the above and damage to the vehicle caused by the driver themselves, as well as vandalism and other risks. This is usually the most expensive type of insurance. For valuable cars, many insurers only offer comprehensive insurance.

Vehicles that are exempt from the requirement to be covered under the Act include those owned by certain councils and local authorities, national park authorities, education authorities, police authorities, fire authorities, health service bodies and security services.

The insurance certificate or cover note issued by the insurance company constitutes legal evidence that the vehicle specified on the document is insured. The law says that an authorised person, such as a police officer, may require a driver to produce an insurance certificate for inspection. If the driver cannot show the document immediately on request, and proof of insurance cannot be found by other means such as the Police National Computer, drivers are no longer issued a HORT/1. This was an order with seven days, from midnight of the date of issue, to take a valid insurance certificate (and usually other driving documents as well) to a police station of the driver's choice. Failure to produce an insurance certificate is an offence. The HORT/1 was commonly known – even by the issuing authorities when dealing with the public – as a "Producer".

Insurance is more expensive in Northern Ireland than in other parts of the UK.[vague][citation needed] In 2010 the cost of car insurance rose by an average of 33%.[15]

Prior to 1 October 2014, all motorists in the UK were required to prominently display a vehicle excise licence (tax disc) on their vehicle when it was kept or driven on public roads. This helped to ensure that most people had adequate insurance on their vehicles because insurance cover was required to purchase a disc, although the insurance must merely have been valid at the time of purchase and not necessarily for the life of the tax disc.[16] Post 1 October 2014 it is no longer a requirement to display a vehicle excise licence (tax disc) on a vehicle.[17]

The Motor Insurers' Bureau (MIB) compensates the victims of road accidents caused by uninsured and untraced motorists. It also operates a number of Motor Insurance Databases, which contain details of every insured vehicle in the country and acts as a means to share information between Insurance Companies.

On 1 March 2011 the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg ruled that gender could no longer be used by insurers to set car insurance premiums. The new ruling will come into action from December 2012.[citation needed]

In June 2011 a new law known as Continuous Insurance Enforcement came into force in the UK meaning that a vehicle must have a valid insurance policy if it has a tax disc, whether or not it is kept on public roads and whether or not it is driven.[18] If the car is to be "laid up" for whatever reason, the tax disc must be surrendered and a SORN declaration completed to say that it is off the public roads.

Investigation into repair costs & fraudulent claims[edit]
In September 2012 it was announced that the Competition Commission had launched an investigation into the UK system for credit repairs and credit hire of an alternative vehicle by a 3rd party following a non-fault accident. It was announced that insurers of vehicles that had caused a valid claim were unable to control the costs that were applied to the claim by means of repairs, storage, vehicle hire, referral fees and personal injury claims. Many accident management companies will take over the running of a non fault claim and arrange everything for the 3rd party. The subsequent cost of some items submitted for consideration has been a cause for concern over recent years and this has caused an increase in the premium costs. Also, the recent craze of "Cash for crash" has substantially raised the cost of policies. This is where two parties arrange a collision between their vehicles and one driver making excessive claims for damage and non existent injuries to themselves and the passengers that they had arranged to be "in the vehicle" at the time of the collision. Another recent development has seen crashes being caused delibarately by a driver "slamming" on their brakes so that the driver behind impacts them, this is usually carried out at roundabout junctions, when the following driver is looking to the right for oncoming traffic and does not notice that the vehicle in front has suddenly stopped for no reason.

United States[edit]
Main article: Vehicle insurance in the United States
The regulations for vehicle insurance differ with each of the 50 US states and other territories, with each U.S. state having its own mandatory minimum coverage requirements (see separate main article). Each of the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia requires drivers to have insurance coverage for both bodily injury and property damage, but the minimum amount of coverage required by law varies by state. For example, minimum bodily injury liability coverage requirements range from $20,000 in Florida to $100,000 in Alaska and Maine, while minimum property damage liability requirements range from $5,000 (four states) to $25,000 (16 states).[19]

Coverage levels[edit]
Vehicle insurance can cover some or all of the following items:

The insured party (medical payments)
The insured vehicle (physical damage)
Third parties (car and people, property damage and bodily injury)
Third party, fire and theft
In some jurisdictions coverage for injuries to persons riding in the insured vehicle is available without regard to fault in the auto accident (No Fault Auto Insurance)
The cost to rent a vehicle if yours is damaged.
The cost to tow your vehicle to a repair facility.
Accidents involving uninsured motorists.
Different policies specify the circumstances under which each item is covered. For example, a vehicle can be insured against theft, fire damage, or accident damage independently.

Excess[edit]
An excess payment, also known as a deductible, is a fixed contribution that must be paid each time a car is repaired with the charges billed to an automotive insurance policy. Normally this payment is made directly to the accident repair "garage" (the term "garage" refers to an establishment where vehicles are serviced and repaired) when the owner collects the car. If one's car is declared to be a "write off" (or "totaled"), then the insurance company will deduct the excess agreed on the policy from the settlement payment it makes to the owner.

If the accident was the other driver's fault, and this fault is accepted by the third party's insurer, then the vehicle owner may be able to reclaim the excess payment from the other person's insurance company.

Compulsory excess[edit]
A compulsory excess is the minimum excess payment the insurer will accept on the insurance policy. Minimum excesses vary according to the personal details, driving record and the insurance company.

Voluntary excess[edit]
To reduce the insurance premium, the insured party may offer to pay a higher excess (deductible) than the compulsory excess demanded by the insurance company. The voluntary excess is the extra amount, over and above the compulsory excess, that is agreed to be paid in the event of a claim on the policy. As a bigger excess reduces the financial risk carried by the insurer, the insurer is able to offer a significantly lower premium.

Basis of premium charges[edit]
Main article: auto insurance risk selection
Depending on the jurisdiction, the insurance premium can be either mandated by the government or determined by the insurance company, in accordance with a framework of regulations set by the government. Often, the insurer will have more freedom to set the price on physical damage coverages than on mandatory liability coverages.

When the premium is not mandated by the government, it is usually derived from the calculations of an actuary, based on statistical data. The premium can vary depending on many factors that are believed to have an impact on the expected cost of future claims.[20] Those factors can include the car characteristics, the coverage selected (deductible, limit, covered perils), the profile of the driver (age, gender, driving history) and the usage of the car (commute to work or not, predicted annual distance driven).[21]

Gender[edit]
On 1 March 2011, the European Court of Justice decided insurance companies who used gender as a risk factor when calculating insurance premiums were breaching EU equality laws.[22] The Court ruled that car-insurance companies were discriminating against men.[22]

Age[edit]
Teenage drivers who have no driving record will have higher car insurance premiums. However, young drivers are often offered discounts if they undertake further driver training on recognized courses, such as the Pass Plus scheme in the UK. In the US many insurers offer a good-grade discount to students with a good academic record and resident-student discounts to those who live away from home. Generally insurance premiums tend to become lower at the age of 25. Some insurance companies offer "stand alone" car insurance policies specifically for teenagers with lower premiums. By placing restrictions on teenagers' driving (forbidding driving after dark, or giving rides to other teens, for example), these companies effectively reduce their risk.[23]

Senior drivers are often eligible for retirement discounts, reflecting the lower average miles driven by this age group. However, rates may increase for senior drivers after age 65, due to increased risk associated with much older drivers. Typically, the increased risk for drivers over 65 years of age is associated with slower reflexes, reaction times, and being more injury-prone.[citation needed]

U.S. driving history[edit]
In most U.S. states, moving violations, including running red lights and speeding, assess points on a driver's driving record. Since more points indicate an increased risk of future violations, insurance companies periodically review drivers' records, and may raise premiums accordingly. Rating practices, such as debit for a poor driving history, are not dictated by law. Many insurers allow one moving violation every three to five years before increasing premiums. Accidents affect insurance premiums similarly. Depending on the severity of the accident and the number of points assessed, rates can increase by as much as twenty to thirty percent.[24] Any motoring convictions should be disclosed to insurers, as the driver is assessed by risk from prior experiences while driving on the road.

Marital status[edit]
Statistics show that married drivers average fewer accidents than the rest of the population so policy owners who are married often receive lower premiums than single persons.[25]

Vehicle classification[edit]
Two of the most important factors that go into determining the underwriting risk on motorized vehicles are: performance capability and retail cost. The most commonly available providers of auto insurance have underwriting restrictions against vehicles that are either designed to be capable of higher speeds and performance levels, or vehicles that retail above a certain dollar amount. Vehicles that are commonly considered luxury automobiles usually carry more expensive physical damage premiums because they are more expensive to replace. Vehicles that can be classified as high performance autos will carry higher premiums generally because there is greater opportunity for risky driving behavior. Motorcycle insurance may carry lower property-damage premiums because the risk of damage to other vehicles is minimal, yet have higher liability or personal-injury premiums, because motorcycle riders face different physical risks while on the road. Risk classification on automobiles also takes into account the statistical analysis of reported theft, accidents, and mechanical malfunction on every given year, make, and model of auto.

Distance[edit]
Some car insurance plans do not differentiate in regard to how much the car is used. There are however low-mileage discounts offered by some insurance providers. Other methods of differentiation would include: over-road distance between the ordinary residence of a subject and their ordinary, daily destinations.

Reasonable distance estimation[edit]
Another important factor in determining car-insurance premiums involves the annual mileage put on the vehicle, and for what reason. Driving to and from work every day at a specified distance, especially in urban areas where common traffic routes are known, presents different risks than how a retiree who does not work any longer may use their vehicle. Common practice has been that this information was provided solely by the insured person, but some insurance providers have started to collect regular odometer readings to verify the risk.

Odometer-based systems[edit]
Cents Per Mile Now[26] (1986) advocates classified odometer-mile rates, a type of usage-based insurance. After the company's risk factors have been applied, and the customer has accepted the per-mile rate offered, then customers buy prepaid miles of insurance protection as needed, like buying gallons of gasoline (litres of petrol). Insurance automatically ends when the odometer limit (recorded on the car's insurance ID card) is reached, unless more distance is bought. Customers keep track of miles on their own odometer to know when to buy more. The company does no after-the-fact billing of the customer, and the customer doesn't have to estimate a "future annual mileage" figure for the company to obtain a discount. In the event of a traffic stop, an officer could easily verify that the insurance is current, by comparing the figure on the insurance card to that on the odometer.

Critics point out the possibility of cheating the system by odometer tampering. Although the newer electronic odometers are difficult to roll back, they can still be defeated by disconnecting the odometer wires and reconnecting them later. However, as the Cents Per Mile Now website points out:

As a practical matter, resetting odometers requires equipment plus expertise that makes stealing insurance risky and uneconomical. For example, to steal 20,000 miles [32,200 km] of continuous protection while paying for only the 2000 in the 35000 to 37000 range on the odometer, the resetting would have to be done at least nine times, to keep the odometer reading within the narrow 2,000-mile [3,200 km] covered range. There are also powerful legal deterrents to this way of stealing insurance protection. Odometers have always served as the measuring device for resale value, rental and leasing charges, warranty limits, mechanical breakdown insurance, and cents-per-mile tax deductions or reimbursements for business or government travel. Odometer tampering, detected during claim processing, voids the insurance and, under decades-old state and federal law, is punishable by heavy fines and jail.

Under the cents-per-mile system, rewards for driving less are delivered automatically, without the need for administratively cumbersome and costly GPS technology. Uniform per-mile exposure measurement for the first time provides the basis for statistically valid rate classes. Insurer premium income automatically keeps pace with increases or decreases in driving activity, cutting back on resulting insurer demand for rate increases and preventing today's windfalls to insurers, when decreased driving activity lowers costs but not premiums.

GPS-based system[edit]
In 1998, the Progressive Insurance company started a pilot program in Texas, in which drivers received a discount for installing a GPS-based device that tracked their driving behavior and reported the results via cellular phone to the company.[27] Policyholders were reportedly more upset about having to pay for the expensive device than they were over privacy concerns.[citation needed] The program was discontinued in 2000. In following years many policies (including Progressive) have been trialed and successfully introduced worldwide into what are referred to as Telematic Insurance. Such 'telematic' policies typically are based on black-box insurance technology, such devices derive from stolen vehicle and fleet tracking but are used for insurance purposes. Since 2010 GPS-based and Telematic Insurance systems have become more mainstream in the auto insurance market not just aimed at specialised auto-fleet markets or high value vehicles (with an emphasis on stolen vehicle recovery). Modern GPS-based systems are branded as 'PAYD' Pay As You Drive insurance policies, 'PHYD' Pay How You Drive or since 2012 Smartphone auto insurance policies which utilise smartphones as a GPS sensor, e.g. [28]

OBDII-based system[edit]
The Progressive Corporation launched Snapshot to give drivers a customized insurance rate based on recording how, how much, and when their car is driven.[29] Snapshot is currently available in 45 states plus the District of Columbia. Because insurance is regulated at the state level, Snapshot is currently not available in Alaska, California, Hawaii, Indiana and North Carolina. [29] Driving data is transmitted to the company using an on-board telematic device. The device connects to a car's OnBoard Diagnostic (OBD-II) port (all petrol automobiles in the USA built after 1996 have an OBD-II.) and transmits speed, time of day and number of miles the car is driven. Cars that are driven less often, in less-risky ways, and at less-risky times of day, can receive large discounts. Progressive has received patents on its methods and systems of implementing usage-based insurance and has licensed these methods and systems to other companies.

Credit ratings[edit]
Insurance companies have started using credit ratings of their policyholders to determine risk. Drivers with good credit scores get lower insurance premiums, as it is believed that they are more financially stable, more responsible and have the financial means to better maintain their vehicles. Those with lower credit scores can have their premiums raised or insurance canceled outright.[30] It has been shown that good drivers with spotty credit records could be charged higher premiums than bad drivers with good credit records.[31]

Behavior-based insurance[edit]
The use of non-intrusive load monitoring to detect drunk driving and other risky behaviors has been proposed.[32] A US patent application combining this technology with a usage based insurance product to create a new type of behavior based auto insurance product is currently open for public comment on peer to patent.[33] See Behavior-based safety. Behaviour based Insurance focusing upon driving is often called Telematics or Telematics2.0 in some cases monitoring focus upon behavioural analysis such as smooth driving.
What Is Covered by a Basic Auto Insurance Policy?
Your auto policy may include six coverages. Each coverage is priced separately.

1. Bodily Injury Liability
This coverage applies to injuries that you, the designated driver or policyholder, cause to someone else. You and family members listed on the policy are also covered when driving someone else’s car with their permission.

It’s very important to have enough liability insurance, because if you are involved in a serious accident, you may be sued for a large sum of money. Definitely consider buying more than the state-required minimum to protect assets such as your home and savings.

2. Medical Payments or Personal Injury Protection (PIP)
This coverage pays for the treatment of injuries to the driver and passengers of the policyholder's car. At its broadest, PIP can cover medical payments, lost wages and the cost of replacing services normally performed by someone injured in an auto accident. It may also cover funeral costs.

3. Property Damage Liability
This coverage pays for damage you (or someone driving the car with your permission) may cause to someone else's property. Usually, this means damage to someone else’s car, but it also includes damage to lamp posts, telephone poles, fences, buildings or other structures your car hit.

4. Collision
This coverage pays for damage to your car resulting from a collision with another car, object or as a result of flipping over. It also covers damage caused by potholes. Collision coverage is generally sold with a deductible of $250 to $1,000—the higher your deductible, the lower your premium. Even if you are at fault for the accident, your collision coverage will reimburse you for the costs of repairing your car, minus the deductible. If you're not at fault, your insurance company may try to recover the amount they paid you from the other driver’s insurance company. If they are successful, you'll also be reimbursed for the deductible.

5. Comprehensive
This coverage reimburses you for loss due to theft or damage caused by something other than a collision with another car or object, such as fire, falling objects, missiles, explosion, earthquake, windstorm, hail, flood, vandalism, riot, or contact with animals such as birds or deer.

Comprehensive insurance is usually sold with a $100 to $300 deductible, though you may want to opt for a higher deductible as a way of lowering your premium.

Comprehensive insurance will also reimburse you if your windshield is cracked or shattered. Some companies offer glass coverage with or without a deductible.

6. Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Coverage
This coverage will reimburse you, a member of your family, or a designated driver if one of you is hit by an uninsured or hit-and-run driver.

Underinsured motorist coverage comes into play when an at-fault driver has insufficient insurance to pay for your total loss. This coverage will also protect you if you are hit as a pedestrian.
Glossary of Common Auto Insurance Terms

NOTICE: This document is for informational purposes only and is not intended to alter or replace the insurance policy. Additionally, this informational sheet is not intended to fully set out your rights and obligations or the rights and obligations of the insurance company. If you have questions about your insurance, you should consult your insurance agent, the insurance company, or the language of the insurance policy.


A

Actual cash value (ACV) - The value of your property, based on the current cost to replace it minus depreciation.

Adjuster - A person who investigates and settles insurance claims.

Agent - A person who sells insurance policies.

Application - A form you fill out with information about you that an insurance company will use to decide whether to issue you a policy and how much to charge.

B

Benchmark rate(s) -The rates set annually by the Commissioner of Insurance that rate-regulated insurance companies use to reference their rates. Rate-regulated insurance companies filing rates within a range of 30 percent above or below the benchmarks may use them immediately upon filing without prior approval. A company that wants to set its rates outside this range must receive the Commissioner´s prior approval.

Binder - A temporary insurance contract that provides proof of coverage until you receive a permanent policy.

Bodily injury (BI) - Physical injury to a person.

C

Cancellation - Termination of an insurance policy by the company or insured before the renewal date.

Claimant - A person who makes an insurance claim. 

Collision coverage - Pays for damage to your car without regard to who caused an accident. The company must pay for the repair or up to the actual cash value of your vehicle, minus your deductible.

Comprehensive coverage (physical damage other than collision) - Pays for damage to or loss of your automobile from causes other than accidents. These include hail, vandalism, flood, fire, and theft.

Contract - In most cases, the term "contract" refers to an insurance policy. A policy is considered to be a contract between the insurance company and the policyholder.

D

Declarations page - The page in your policy that shows the name and address of the insurer, the period of time a policy is in force, a description of the vehicle, the amount of the premium, and the amount of coverage.

Deductible - The amount the insured must pay in a loss before any payment is due from the company.

Depreciation - The act of lowering an item´s value due to use or wear and tear.

E

Earned premium - The portion of a policy premium that has been used to actually buy coverage, or that the insurance company has "earned." For instance, if you have a six-month policy that you paid for in advance, two months into the policy, there would be two months of earned premium. The remaining four months of premium is called unearned premium.

Endorsement - A written agreement attached to a policy expanding or limiting the benefits otherwise payable under the policy. Same as a "rider."


Gap Insurance - Insurance that pays the difference between the actual cash value of a vehicle and the amount still to be paid on the loan, Some gap policies may also cover the amount of the deductible.



Lapse - Termination of a policy due to non-payment of premiums.

Liability insurance - Pays for injuries to the other party and damages to the other vehicle resulting from an accident you caused. It also pays if the accident was caused by someone covered by your policy, including a driver operating your car with your permission.

Liability limits - The maximum amount your liability policy will pay. Your policy must pay at least $25,000 for each injured person, up to a total of $50,000 per accident, and $25,000 for property damage per accident. This basic coverage is called "25/50/25" coverage.

Loss - The amount an insurance company pays on a claim.

M 

Medical payments and personal injury protection (PIP) - Both pay limited medical and funeral expenses if you, a family member, or a passenger in your car is injured or killed in a motor vehicle accident. PIP also pays lost-income benefits.

N

Named driver exclusion - An endorsement that provides that a policy does not cover accidents when a specifically named person is the driver.

Named driver policy - An automobile insurance policy that doesn't provide coverage for an individual residing in a named insured 's household specifically unless the individual is named on the policy. The term includes an automobile insurance policy that has been endorsed to provide coverage only for drivers specifically named on the policy.

Non-owners policy - Insurance coverage that offers liability, uninsured motorist, and medical payments to a named insured who does not own a vehicle.

Non-renewal - A decision by an insurance company not to renew a policy.



Policy period - The period a policy is in force, from the beginning or effective date to the expiration date.

Premium - The amount paid by an insured to an insurance company to obtain or maintain an insurance policy.

Property damage (PD) - Physical damage to property.

Q

R

Rental reimbursement coverage - Pays a set daily amount for a rental car if your car is being repaired because of damage covered by your auto policy.

Rider - A written agreement attached to the policy expanding or limiting the benefits otherwise payable under the policy. Same as an "endorsement."

Reinstatement - The process by which a life insurance company puts a policy back in force after it lapsed because of nonpayment of renewal premiums.

S

Surcharge - An extra charge added to your premium by an insurance company. For automobile insurance, a surcharge is usually added if you have at-fault accidents.

Surplus lines - Coverage from out-of-state companies not licensed in Texas but legally eligible to sell insurance on a "surplus lines" basis. Surplus lines companies generally charge more than licensed companies and often offer less coverage.

T

Towing and labor coverage - Pays for towing charges when your car can´t be driven. Also pays labor charges, such as changing a flat tire, at the place where your car broke down.

U

Underwriter - The person who reviews an application for insurance and decides if the applicant is acceptable and at what premium rate.

Underwriting - The process an insurance company uses to decide whether to accept or reject an application for a policy.

Uninsured/underinsured motorist (UM/UIM) coverage - Pays for your injuries and property damage caused by a hit-and-run driver or a motorist without liability insurance. It will also pay when your medical and car repair bills are higher than the other driver´s liability coverage.

Contents insurance is insurance that pays for damage to, or loss of, an individual’s personal possessions while they are located within that individual’s home. Some contents insurance policies also provide restricted cover for personal possessions temporarily taken away from the home by the policyholder.

In this context "possessions" means anything that is not permanently attached to the structure of the home (possessions that are permanently attached to the structure of the home can only be insured via home insurance.) Some contents policies may also include possessions kept in outbuildings or in the garden area attached to the house.

Contents insurance is usually sold alongside home insurance but it can also be purchased as a stand-alone policy, especially for those who are renting rather than owning their home.
Mortgage life insurance is a form of insurance specifically designed to protect a repayment mortgage. If the policyholder were to die while the mortgage life insurance was in force, the policy would pay out a capital sum that will be just sufficient to repay the outstanding mortgage.

Mortgage life insurance is supposed to protect the borrower's ability to repay the mortgage for the lifetime of the mortgage. This is in contrast to Private mortgage insurance, which is meant to protect the lender against the risk of default on the part of the borrower.

Contents  [hide] 
1 The Mechanics
2 The Controversy
3 Private Mortgage Insurance
4 See also
5 References
The Mechanics[edit]
When the insurance commences, the value of the insurance coverage must equal the capital outstanding on the repayment mortgage and the policy’s termination date must be the same as the date scheduled for the final payment on the repayment mortgage. The insurance company then calculates the annual rate at which the insurance coverage should decrease in order to mirror the value of the capital outstanding on the repayment mortgage. Even if the client is behind on repayments, the insurance will normally adhere to its original schedule and will not keep up with the outstanding debt.

Some mortgage life insurance policies will also pay out if the policyholder is diagnosed with a terminal illness from which the policyholder is expected to die within 12 months of diagnosis. Insurance companies sometimes add other features into their mortgage life insurance policies to reflect conditions in their country’s domestic insurance market and their domestic tax regulations.

The Controversy[edit]
Based on the mechanics of the product, mortgage life insurance is a financial product which paradoxically declines in value as the client-borrower pays more premium to the insurer. In many cases, traditional life insurance (whether term or permanent) can offer a better level of protection for considerably smaller premiums.

The biggest advantage of traditional life insurance over mortgage life insurance is that the former maintains its face value throughout the lifetime of the policy, whereas the latter promises to pay out an amount equal to the client's outstanding mortgage debt at any point in time, which is inherently a decreasing sum. Hence, mortgage life insurance is extremely profitable for lenders and/or insurers and equally disadvantageous to borrowers.

In addition, lending banks often incentivise borrowers to purchase mortgage life insurance in addition to their new mortgage by means that are on the verge of tied selling practices. Tied selling of a product of self or of an affiliated party, however, is illegal in most jurisdictions. In Canada, for example, this practice is explicitly forbidden by Section 459.1 of the Bank Act (1991).[1]

Finally, mortgage life insurance is not required by law. It is up to the client-borrower whether he or she will opt to protect his or her property investment by an insurance product or not. Similarly, the choice of insurer is completely unrestrained as well.

Because of these suboptimal qualities of mortgage life insurance, the product has been subject to sharp criticism by financial experts and by the media across North America for over a decade.[2][3] This has arguably led to fewer banks actively advertising this product in the recent years, although many still keep it in their portfolios. However, many critics fail to consider that in many cases where term life insurance is denied for health reasons, mortgage life insurance is still available. As such, mortgage life insurance can cover the biggest expense left by a deceased breadwinner - i.e. housing costs. Thus, it is simplistic to dismiss it out of hand as disadvantageous to borrowers.

Private Mortgage Insurance[edit]
The term Mortgage insurance may in some contexts refer to Private mortgage insurance (PMI), also known as Lenders mortgage insurance.[3] Private mortgage insurance protects the lender instead of the borrower, although its premiums are payable by the borrower. This type of insurance is compulsory in certain jurisdictions for mortgages started with low down payments.

In the United States, subject to Homeowners Protection Act of 1998,[4] a borrower who provides less than 20% down payment up front may be required to pay for private mortgage insurance until the outstanding mortgage is less than 80% of the value of the property
Parts of an insurance contract[edit] Declarations - identifies who is an insured, the insured's address, the insuring company, what risks or property are covered, the policy limits (amount of insurance), any applicable deductibles, the policy period and premium amount.
Auto Insurance Basics

Policy Components

Think of your auto insurance policy as six separate policies. Some types of coverage are required by state law, depending on where you live. Others are optional. Consider each one and ask yourself how much you need. Each type of coverage has its own premium. Add them up and you've got the price of your auto insurance policy. Subtract the ones you may not need and you gain some control over the cost.

Bodily injury liability (BI) coverage covers you if you cause an accident in which someone else is hurt or killed. State laws differ as to how much you are required to carry. Many financial experts recommend carrying at least $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurance - commonly expressed as "100/300." Consider what assets you have to protect and what you can afford when deciding how much to purchase.

Property damage liability (PD) coverage covers you when you damage someone else's property. Usually it's someone else's car, but it could apply to buildings, utility poles, garage doors, and other physical property. State laws determine the minimum you must purchase.

Collision coverage covers damage to your car if you run into another car, a brick wall, a fire hydrant, or other object. This coverage is not required by law, though your bank may require it if you have an auto loan. You may choose a deductible on this coverage—what you must first pay out-of-pocket for a claim before the insurance kicks in.

Comprehensive coverage covers you in case your car is stolen or damaged in ways that don't involve a collision. Covered risks include hail, fire, theft, flood, earthquake, explosion, falling objects, and encounters with wildlife, such as deer. Comprehensive is optional coverage, though your bank may require it if you have an auto loan. You may choose a deductible on this coverage.

Uninsured/Underinsured motorist (UM/UIM) coverage covers medical and other expenses when you are hit by a driver without adequate auto insurance. Whether this coverage is mandatory or optional depends on your state laws. You can purchase additional coverage to pay for damage to your car if hit by an uninsured motorist, but many people instead just purchase collision and comprehensive.

Medical payments coverage (Med Pay, or MPC) acts as primary coverage for medical expenses you and your passengers incur if injured in a motor vehicle accident, regardless of fault. States have different laws regarding this coverage.

How do I read my auto insurance policy?

Your policy is a legal contract, so at first glance it can seem confusing. But, if you know what to look for and where to find it, your policy becomes a lot easier to understand. Each auto and homeowners insurance policy has three standard parts:

Declarations Page. This is where you'll find your name, a statement of the policy period during which you are covered and the amount of premium you pay. The "dec" page also includes a description of the insurance coverage provided and gives the maximum dollar limit the insurer will pay for a claim under each coverage.

Insuring Agreement. This is the main part of the policy. It describes what the insurance company will do in exchange for the premium you're paying. The insuring agreement will also say who is covered: The persons named as insureds on the declarations page, residents of the same household and persons using the car with the permission of the insured. Everything is spelled out specifically in an attempt to avoid misunderstanding. Read the definitions section and the list of exclusions that apply to each coverage. Its vital that you know what you are covered for and what you are not covered for when you need to use your coverage!

Conditions of the policy. This last section describes your responsibilities when you have a claim, for example how much time you have to report it and what documentation you must give to the insurance company. It also explains the terms for canceling your policy—both for you and the insurer. You can cancel your policy at any time, however your insurance provider may only cancel under certain conditions and with advance notice to you.
Reading and Understanding Your Life Insurance Policy

Most people hate the thought of reading a life insurance policy (or any insurance policy, for that matter). However, if you can find the time and muster the patience, it's probably a good idea to read through your policy. If you do, you'll understand your policy better and gain an understanding of your rights and obligations under the contract.

The parts of a life insurance policy

A life insurance policy contains the following parts:

A cover page that identifies the insurance company and the type of plan, offers your right to return the policy within 21 days if you're not satisfied, and is signed by an insurance company officer.
A schedule of benefits and specifications page that describes the amount of benefits, the premium and other charges, the insured, the issue date, the policy number, and the premium class (e.g., preferred, standard).
Tables showing future premium projections or guaranteed cash values, depending on the type of policy.
A section devoted to definitions of the terms used in the policy.
A section that explains your rights as an owner. As the owner, you have certain privileges of ownership, including the right to transfer or assign the policy, the right to change the beneficiary, the right to receive the cash value and dividends (if applicable), and the right to borrow against the cash value (again, if applicable).
A settlement section that includes instructions on how to make a claim and information about the choices your beneficiary has regarding the death benefit.
Riders (benefits you added to the standard policy) or endorsements (changes to the standard policy), if any, will be attached to the policy along with a copy of your application.
Policy provisions, which are another important part of your life insurance policy. Despite the lack of a uniform contract, most states have enacted legislation that makes certain policy provisions mandatory, and the commissioner of insurance must approve the final wording adopted by the insurance company. Even if certain provisions are not required by law, competition between companies generally forces them to be very similar. Here are some common provisions to look for when you read your policy.
Entire contract

Most states require that a clause be inserted in your policy stating that the policy and the application attached to it together form the entire contract between you and the insurer. This clause is beneficial to you because if your insurer accuses you of misrepresentation and seeks to void the contract, it's prevented from using other evidence outside of the contract. It can void the contract only if you made false statements on your application.

Incontestability

This provision states that the contract cannot be contested, except for nonpayment of premiums, after the policy has been in force during the insured's lifetime for a period of two years from the date of issue. This provision allows the insured to (eventually) be secure in the fact that the beneficiaries will not have to prove that statements made on the application were true to collect the policy benefits. It also gives the insurance company a period in which it can contest a policy for fraudulent statements made on the application.

Misstatement of age

This is somewhat of an exception to the incontestability provision. The incontestability provision does not apply when you, the insured, misrepresent your age. The reason is simple. Because age is a key factor in determining whether a company offers you life insurance and in setting premiums, some applicants are tempted to understate their age in order to pay a lower premium. Understandably, insurers want to avoid this. The misstatement of age clause provides that if you have misrepresented your age, the insurer will lower the face amount of the policy to the amount of insurance that the premium paid would have purchased at the correct age.

Grace period

Your policy specifies the due date for premiums (e.g., monthly, quarterly, semiannually, annually). Whatever the due date, you generally must pay your premiums on or before that date. If you fail to do so, however, you may still pay the premium during the grace period. The grace period is required by most state laws and typically lasts for 31 days. For example, if you have a premium due on January 1 and don't pay it by that date, you would have until February 1 to make the payment before the policy would lapse. If you died on January 15, the death benefit proceeds would still be paid, but minus the amount of the premium in default.

Reinstatement

Most life insurance contracts contain a clause that allows you to reinstate or reactivate a lapsed policy (i.e., one for which you did not pay the premium due by the end of the grace period). However, reinstatement is not your unconditional right. If available, it will be subject to a number of very specific requirements on your part. First, if you had a cash value policy, reinstatement will be possible only if, at the time of the policy's lapse, you did not withdraw its cash surrender value. Second, reinstatement must be accomplished within a specified time period, normally five years after the lapse. Third, you must resubmit proper evidence of your insurability as if you were applying for the insurance all over again. Finally, an insurer will generally permit reinstatement only if you pay all of the overdue premiums (plus interest) and any indebtedness from loans that may have existed at the time of lapse (plus interest).

Suicide

Almost all life insurance policies exclude suicide during a specified period after the policy is issued. Under this clause, the typical period during which coverage for suicide will be denied is two years (although some policies limit it to one year). If the insured commits suicide (whether sane or insane) within two years after the issue date of the policy, the insurer will not pay any death benefits to the beneficiary. The insurer would be responsible for refunding only the premiums paid on the policy.
Life Insurance FAQs

Who Needs Life Insurance?

Your need for life insurance varies with your age and responsibilities. It is a very important part of financial planning. There are several reasons to purchase life insurance. You may need to replace income that would be lost with the death of a wage earner. You may want to make sure your dependents do not incur significant debt when you die. Life insurance may allow them to keep assets versus selling them to pay outstanding bills or taxes.

Consumers should consider the following factors when purchasing life insurance:

Medical expenses previous to death, burial costs and estate taxes;
Support while remaining family members try to secure employment; and
Continued monthly bills and expenses, day-care costs, college tuition and retirement.
What is the Right Kind of Life Insurance?

All policies are not the same. Some give coverage for your lifetime and other cover you for a specific number of years. Some build up cash values and others do not. Some policies combine different kinds of insurance, and others let you change from one kind of insurance to another. Some policies may offer other benefits while you are still living. There are two basic types of life insurance: term insurance and permanent insurance.

Term Insurance

Term insurance generally has lower premiums in the early years, but does not build up cash values that you can use in the future. You may combine cash value life insurance with term insurance for the period of your greatest need for life insurance to replace income.

Term insurance covers you for a term of one or more years. It pays a death benefit only if you die in that term. Term insurance generally offers the largest insurance protection for your premium dollar. It generally does not build up cash value.

You can renew most term insurance policies for one or more terms, even if your health has changed. Each time you renew the policy for a new term, premiums may be higher. Ask what the premiums will be if you continue to renew the policy. Also ask if you will lose the right to renew the policy at a certain age. For a higher premium, some companies will give you the right to keep the policy in force for a guaranteed period at the same price each year. At the end of that time you may need to pass a physical examination to continue coverage, and premiums may increase. You may be able to trade many term insurance policies for a cash value policy during a conversion period even if you are not in good health. Premiums for the new policy will be higher than you have been paying for the term insurance.

Permanent Insurance

Permanent insurance (such as universal life, variable universal life and whole life) provides long-term financial protection. These policies include both a death benefit and, in some cases, cash savings. Because of the savings element, premiums tend to be higher.

How Much Life Insurance Do I Need?

Ask yourself the following questions:

How much of the family income do I provide?
If I were to die, how would my survivors, especially my children, get by?
Does anyone else depend on me financially, such as a parent, grandparent, brother or sister?
Do I have children for whom I would like to set aside money to finish their education in the event of my death?
How will my family pay final expenses and repay debts after my death?
Do I have family members or organizations to whom I would like to leave money?
Will there be estate taxes to pay after my death?
How will inflation affect future needs?
Some insurance experts suggest that you purchase five to eight times your current income. However, it is better to go through the above questions to figure a more accurate amount.

Tips on Buying Life Insurance

Make sure you feel confident in the insurance agent and company.
Decide how much you need, for how long, and what you can afford to pay.
Learn what kinds of policies will provide what you need and pick the one that is best for you.
Do not sign an application until you review it carefully to be sure the answers are complete and accurate.
Do not buy life insurance unless you intend to stick with your plan. It may be very costly if you quit during the early years of the policy.
When you buy a policy, make the check payable to the company, not the agent.
 

When I bought my life insurance policy, the agent said it would be "paid up" after ten years, but it’s been that long and I’m still getting bills. Why?

Your contract (insurance policy) may provide for guaranteed interest rates and/or dividends the insurance company will pay on your premiums. But your premiums must make very high earnings before they will "pay up" your policy. The company must stand behind items that are guaranteed in the contract. Promises of "paid up" life insurance are illegal when based on non-guaranteed values. If you have documentation of the agent promising this, your state insurance department may be able to help. Documentation would include any writing containing the promise -- even an informal, handwritten note or a similar notation by agent.

Who can take out a policy on my life?

Only someone who has an "insurable interest" can purchase an insurance policy on your life. That means a stranger cannot buy a policy to insure your life. People with an insurable interest generally include members of your immediate family. In some circumstances your employer or business partner might also have an insurable interest.

Insurable interest may also be proper for institutions or people who become your major creditors.

Must my beneficiary have an insurable interest?

No. If you buy a policy on your own life, you become the owner of the policy. As the owner, you can name anyone as beneficiary, even a stranger!

What about companies that advertise “no physical exam?”

The insurance may be more expensive than if the company required a physical. Although there is no physical, you will probably have to answer a few, broad health questions on your application.

Some life insurance ads claim “you can not be turned down.” What's the catch?

Such ads are for "guaranteed issue" policies that ask no health history questions. The company knows it is taking a risk because people with bad health could buy their policies. The company balances the risk by charging higher premiums or by limiting the amount of insurance you can buy. The premiums can be almost as much as the insurance. After a few years you could pay more to the insurance company than it will have to pay to your beneficiary. Such policies may offer only the return of your premiums if you die within the first couple of years after you buy the policy.

Why is term life often called “temporary” insurance?

Insurance agents sometimes refer to term insurance as "temporary" because the term policy lasts only for a specific period. It is probably no more "temporary" than your auto or homeowner insurance. Just like term, those types of policies provide coverage for a specific period of time, and must be renewed when that period ends.

Why are some insurance agents reluctant to sell term insurance?

An agent may believe term is risky, but only because you could have a hard time buying a policy in the future if your health deteriorates or you cannot afford the higher premiums. Commissions could also be a reason for an agent who discourages term. The agent often makes less money for selling term than for other forms of life insurance.

What do I get when I buy term insurance?

You have bought and received the company's guarantee that if you die during the term of the policy, it will pay a death benefit to your beneficiary.

Does that mean I've wasted my money if I don't die?

No more than you have wasted money by buying car insurance but never having an accident. You've purchased peace of mind. With term life insurance, if you die during the term, you know the company will pay your beneficiaries.

An insurance agent has suggested I switch term companies every couple of years to take advantage of the company's promotional rates in the first couple of years. Anything wrong with that?

Nothing wrong, but there is always a risk when you switch polices that you could be subject to a new contestability period. You start a new, 2-year contestability period anytime you switch . If you die during that 2-year period, the insurance company can (and probably will) investigate the statements you made on your application . If you've given inaccurate or incomplete answers, the company may (and probably will) refuse to pay the death benefit.

I understand my permanent policy would be “fully paid up” at age 65. What does that mean?

"Fully paid up" means just that. You have made enough premium payments to cover the cost of insurance for the rest of your life.

What happens to the cash value after the policy is fully paid up?

The company plans to use the cash value to pay premiums until you die. If you take cash value out, there may not be enough to pay premiums. The company could require you to resume paying premiums, or reduce the amount of the death benefit to an amount that the remaining cash value will support.

I had a policy that was paid up; now I'm told I don't. What can I do?

You may have signed papers that permitted the cash value of your paid up policy to be used to pay for another, larger policy. If you're not sure or can't remember, call the insurance company.

What is a “participating” policy?

That is a policy that may pay you dividends. You have a chance to "participate" in the company's earnings. A life insurance dividend is actually a refund of part of your premium. When a company collects more money in premiums than it needs to pay death claims and maintain the insurance pool for future claims, the company may pay dividends at the end of that year.

An insurance agent has suggested that I buy term instead of whole life. Does it makesense to buy term and invest the difference?

"Buy term and invest the difference" has been a popular sales slogan for term life. The pitch compares term, the least expensive form of life insurance, with other kinds of life insurance.

Example:

$100,000 death benefit at age 35
Annual whole life premium: $1,800
Annual renewable term premium: $250
Difference: $1,550
What are your choices?

Buy whole life. The “difference” is used to keep your premiums lower than the actual cost of insurance as you get older.
Buy term. You keep the difference.
In addition, make sure you consider the following:

As you get older your term premiums will increase to keep up with the cost of insurance;
If you invested the difference, you could use your investment to pay the higher cost of insurance;
If you spent the difference you will have to dip into other savings to pay higher premiums; and
If your health deteriorates you may not be able to buy a new policy
For 10 years I paid the insurance company $1,000 every year. That's $10,000! But when I cashed in the policy they sent me only $5,800. Where did the rest of my money go?

The rest of the money paid for insurance. You were entitled to only the cash surrender value — that is, the amount you had paid to "pre-fund" insurance in your old age. The amount would have been even less if you had borrowed money that had not yet been repaid.

How much cash value is in my policy?

Read your policy. It has a table of cash values that should provide the answer. Call your agent if you are still not sure of the cash value amount.

What happens to the cash value in my policy when I die?

When you die, the insurance company will pay the death benefit. No matter how much cash value you may have had in the policy the moment before you died, your beneficiaries can collect no more than the stated death benefit. Any loans you have not repaid (plus interest) will be subtracted from the death benefit.

The result: your beneficiary could wind up with less than the face amount of the policy.

The exception: some whole life policies pay both the death benefit and the cash value when you die.
Types of life insurance policies
There are two basic kinds of life insurance policies: whole life and term insurance.

In Lesson 20
glossary
Glossary	take the test
Take
the test
Top things to know
Types of policies
Buying strategies
How much coverage do you need?
How long a term?
A question of health
Web shopping
Money Essentials Lessons
Setting priorities
Making a budget
Basics of banking and saving
Basics of investing
Investing in stocks
Investing in mutual funds
Investing in bonds
Buying a home
Controlling debt
Employee stock options
Saving for college
Kids and money
Planning for retirement
Asset allocation
Hiring financial help
Health insurance
Buying a car
Taxes
Home insurance
Life insurance
Estate planning
Auto insurance
401(k)s
Whole-life policies, a type of permanent insurance, combine life coverage with an investment fund. Here, you're buying a policy that pays a stated, fixed amount on your death, and part of your premium goes toward building cash value from investments made by the insurance company.

Cash value builds tax-deferred each year that you keep the policy, and you can borrow against the cash accumulation fund without being taxed. The amount you pay usually doesn't change throughout the life of the policy.

Universal life is a type of permanent insurance policy that combines term insurance with a money market-type investment that pays a market rate of return. To get a higher return, these policies generally don't guarantee a certain rate.

Variable life and variable universal life are permanent policies with an investment fund tied to a stock or bond mutual-fund investment. Returns are not guaranteed.

The other type of coverage is term insurance, which has no investment component. You're buying life coverage that lasts for a set period of time provided you pay the monthly premium. Annual-renewable term is purchased year-by-year, although you don't have to requalify by showing evidence of good health each year.

When you're young, premiums for annual-renewable term insurance are dirt cheap - as low as a few hundred dollars per year for $250,000 worth of coverage.

As you get older, premiums steadily increase. Level-premium term has somewhat higher - but fixed - premiums for longer periods, anywhere from five to 30 years.DEFINITION OF 'UNDERINSURANCE'
Inadequate insurance coverage by the holder of a policy. In the event of a claim, underinsurance may result in economic losses to the policy holder, since the claim would exceed the maximum amount that can be paid out by the insurance policy. While underinsurance may result in lower premiums paid by the policy holder, the loss arising from a claim may far exceed any marginal savings in insurance premiums.

INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'UNDERINSURANCE'
Underinsurance can cause a serious financial crisis, depending on the asset that is insured and the extent of the shortfall in insurance. For example, assume a house and its contents are insured against all risks for $250,000, with a deductible of $20,000. It is subsequently destroyed in a fire, but the cost to replace the house and contents amounts to $350,000. The homeowner will have to make up the difference of $100,000 plus the $20,000 deductible from his or her own resources.
What is Over Insurance?Earlier this month we discussed the risks of under insurance. In this post we would like to look at the other side of the coin and discuss over insurance. This is something that is not only important for property owners and their short term insurance cover, but also for those policyholders insured with death and disability benefits. In this post we would like to focus on short term insurance.

What is Over Insurance?

Over insurance can be defined as the situation where an insured has bought so much coverage that it exceeds the actual cash value (or the replacement cost) of the risk or property insured.

Example:

Your car is insured for R200,000 and is written off in an accident. The assessor comes to the conclusion that the car can be replaced for R160, 000.

As a result only R160, 000 is paid out. You have however been paying premiums to cover an amount of R200,000 and those premiums paid on the additional R40, 000 have been paid unnecessarily.

Over insurance is a risk to the insurance industry and especially to insurance fraud. The insured who is over insured may be tempted to make a false claim to profit from a loss.

Main differences between under and over insurance

The major differences between under and over insurance can be summarized as follows:

Through under insurance you are insured for less than market value whereas with over insured you are insuring for an amount above market value.
Your risk with under insurance manifests itself when you claim  - and find that less than the insurance claim will be paid as you would have to cover part of the damage yourself.
With over insurance you are at risk of paying too much in premiums from the moment that the market value of insured property is less than the amount insured.
Why would anyone over insure?

You may be so afraid of being under insured that you decide rather insure for more than necessary.
Most often property owners will neglect keeping in mind the depreciation and declining market value of property.
It is important to understand that prices change all the time  - and so does the costs of replacing something destroyed, lost or stolen.
How do we prevent over insurance?

It remains your responsibility – and not that of the broker or insurer - to ensure that your property is insured for the correct value.

Be pro-active with your insurance and financial needs.
Study the terms and conditions of your policy to gain an understanding of what your insurer regards as "over-insurance".
Review your insurance annually and ask your broker or insurance company to ensure that property is not insured for more than its market value.
The aim should be to purchase the right cover and the right price.
It is important as well to enquire as to your financial obligations to the bank if your vehicle is financed through a financial institution.
Keep a file of invoices of goods purchased –but remember – you need to ask your insurer what the costs would be to replace these goods!
There is no reason for you not to have peace of mind that you are correctly insured. Communicate with your insurer, ask questions and keep your insurance cover updated! Now is the time to get hold of that insurance policy and align it with your current financial position!!
It is very important that the person taking out the insurance finds the right
balance between over-insurance and under-insurance.

Under-insurance: You neglect to cover risks that are likely to happen. Or perhaps you do insure the likelihood of the happening, but underestimate the magnitude of the risk.

Over-insurance: The business takes out too much insurance. If the business overestimates the value of possible loss, the premium is high but in event of loss the insurance company will only pay out the real value of the loss.

Average clause: When goods are insured for their full value, the insurance company can pay a claim in full. Unfortunately because of inflation (when the prices of goods rises faster than the value of money), the insured value is often less than the replacement value and the principle of averaging is applied. For example, a television set was insured for R2 000. When it was stolen the replacement cost of the new television was R3 000. The television was only insured for two-thirds of the new value so the insurance company will only pay out 2/3 x R3 000 = R2 000 towards replacing the new television set.

Excess: This is when an amount must be paid as part of the claim. For example, when you dent your car, you must pay the excess of R1 000, then the insurance company will pay the rest of the claim.

What is under insurance and over insurance? Not sure if you meant over insured and under insured. Basically there is a provision in homeowners and condo owner policies called a Co-Insurance penatly if you are not insured to 80% of replacement cost (not market value) of the home. If you are insured less than the 80% (under insured), you will not get you complete coverage limit but a reduced amount. 

Over insured is a little different. Lets say you insure your home at $100,000 and it would only cost $80,000 to replace. The insurance company would only pay the $80,000 but your premium paid was based on the $100,000 amount. If you are over insured, you will over pay for coverage. **Some states are "Valued Policy" states and you would get the full $100,000.
Just a quick answer, but I hoped it helped.
Insurance/ Risk Management
Insurance Valuation

Property insurance valuation (covering all risks of physical damage including machinery breakdown), business continuity insurance valuation, estimated maximum losses, worst case liability exposure, avoiding the costs of over insurance or under insurance for Lloyd’s of London underwriting

Insurance Valuation Services

Property and business insurance not only represents a major cost to all asset intensive businesses, but they represent a way of ensuring business continuity in the event of an insured loss. The intent when taking insurance is to obtain adequate cover, at a cost that reflects the inherent risks and values at risk. Accordingly accurately assessing the sums to be insured, via an insurance valuation, is a vital component in obtaining insurance.

We are seeing a number of our large corporate clients start to move away from subjectively rolling forward historic cost records based on market indices to obtaining comprehensive valuations to avoid the adverse effects of over insurance or under insurance of large asset bases.

Over and Under Insurance

The twin perils of over insurance and under insurance are avoided by an accurate assessment of the Value at Risk.  Over insurance has the result of a business paying excessive premiums. Under insurance, whilst delivering cheaper premiums, can, in the event of a loss, result in insurers failing to pay out sufficient sums to reinstate the assets of a business, or to compensate for business interruption, potentially resulting in the failure of the business.  Accurate, reliable insurance valuation is therefore a key risk management tool for a business.

Changes in the Insurance Market

Lloyd’s of London has recently expressed its significant concern regarding the “Undervaluation of direct United States property exposure” due to:

Incompleteness of property listings
Undervaluation of replacement costs
Errors in coverage terms and wording
Whilst the comment was addressed to the US market, these comments apply worldwide.

Insurance Valuation in the UK

Accordingly, in the UK there has been a shift in the market in the form of:

More onerous valuation requirements for insured assets
Increased financial transparency due to increased regulation
Improved underwriting discipline dictated by both the direct and reinsurance markets
Increased emphasis on a consistent disciplined approach to underwriting
Increased market specialisation of insurance carriers
Increased focus on regional and national geographic factors
Discontinuance of blanket coverage
Appraisal requirements for insured properties
As a result of this increased emphasis, companies that rely on historic records subjected to an index of dubious provenance can be directly penalised through increased insurance premiums.

Companies that rely on historic records subjected to an index of dubious provenance can be directly penalised through increased insurance premiums

Our Work

American Appraisal is the largest full-service independent valuation consulting firm in the world with a global network of offices and staff positioned to serve our clients, both large and small. As a firm we have over 115 years of experience, in assisting clients meet with their domestic and global insurance needs issues.

Independent valuations in accordance with the definition of replacement values for insurance purposes i.e. ‘Replacement-as-New assuming “Day One Reinstatement,” whereby all assets are replaced instantaneously, in the event of loss, by facilities of like kind and similar design to those destroyed, or damaged.’

Founded in 1896, American Appraisal was established with the aim of providing supportable insurance values across the United States.  In the years since, we have continued to focus our efforts on the insurance market, whilst spreading the reach of our services. With offices in over 20 countries, American Appraisal’s insurance valuation specialists undertake valuations worldwide, typically inspecting properties in over 100 countries every year.

We can assist our clients by providing:

Detailed insurance valuation studies including:
Property
Plant and Machinery
Business Interruption
Preparing proof of loss data
Performing pilot studies, including reviewing sums insured across the entire insured portfolio
Assisting clients with rolling programs of insurance valuations
Assisting with desktop updates of the value of insured assets on an annual basis, following an initial full valuation
Preparing loss assessments and assisting with post loss claims management for insurers, the insured and loss adjusters
Provision of reinstatement cost and actual cash value/indemnity value studies
Provision of detailed Business Interruption analysis including the impacts of facility rebuild times, supplier and customer risks
Providing support for our clients’ global insurance programs
 What is my home and contents covered for?

TIO home and contents insurance offers two levels of cover. Listed Events and Accidental Damage, both of which cover you against cyclones, storms, floods. For more information see the Home and Contents page.

How much should I insure my home and contents for?

Our insurance covers you for replacement. You need to determine sums insured that will be adequate to replace your home and all of its improvements and contents, new for old.

What will happen if I under insure my home or contents?

You cannot receive more than the sum insured you have nominated.

If you are under insured and your home is destroyed or seriously damaged, for example by cyclone or fire, then you may have to pay any shortfall between your sum insured and the actual rebuilding cost.

If your contents sum insured is inadequate, you may not be able to fully refurnish your home.

What will happen if I over insure my home or contents?

The maximum you can receive is the cost of replacement.

 How do I make sure my home is fully covered?

Your Home sum insured should reflect what it would cost to rebuild your house today using the same materials and the same style of fixtures and fittings. The cost to rebuild your home is not necessarily the real estate market value.

It is your responsibility to make sure you are adequately insured. To help you determine your sum insured use our on-line Home Building Sum Insured Calculator.

How do I make sure my contents are fully covered?

Your Contents sum insured should reflect what it would cost to replace all your contents as new at today's prices.

It is your responsibility to make sure you are adequately insured. To help you determine your sum insured use our on-line Home Contents Sum Insured Calculator.

Do I need to specify any valuable items to get full cover?

Yes. Some valuable items are subject to limited cover. The following items are limited to $2500 per item up to a maximum of 20% of your nominated sum insured:

Jewellery, watches, unset gem stones, gold or silver articles, curios, furs and musical instruments.
 

The following items are limited to $2500 any one set or collection up to a maximum of $5000 in total:
Collections - where a collection is defined as a group of individual items, which are of a similar type and which, when grouped together, take on a value greater than the sum of the individual items' values. Examples may be stamp, medal and coin collections.
 

If you would like any such items covered for more than the specified limits, you will need to tell us about them and give their values. If we agree to provide cover we will list them on your certificate of insurance. An additional premium may be payable and we may require written valuation/s from a recognised expert.

I am upgrading the security on my property, do I have to advise TIO?

If you are changing the security on your property, you should inform us, as it may change the conditions of your insurance. You may eligible to receive a discount.

Got a question we haven't covered?

Send us a request for information, and one of our insurance experts will get back to you.  Alternatively you can call us on 1300 301833 during business hours or visit your nearest TIO branch.
underinsurance is a A situation wherein the owner of a property or the person suffering a health condition does not have enough insurance to cover the value of the item or the health care costs.
Recent natural disasters and especially flooding have brought the dreaded message for many insured farm owners “Sir – You are under insured!” This is a major concern for both policyholders and short term insurers.

Many South Africans assume that if they have a home contents insurance policy in place, they will be covered if any of their possessions are lost, stolen or damaged. The same applies to farmers who have insured their farming equipment.

What they don’t realise is that if these possessions are not insured at their replacement value they could have to cough up – even if they have been diligently paying their insurance premiums every month.

According to research conducted by CIB Insurance Solutions (CIB),  in 2010, underestimating the replacement value of farming equipment, combined with a failure to regularly review their policies, means that the percentage of South Africa’s farmers who are underinsured could be as high as 70%.

In this post we would like to pay closer attention to the nature and risks of under insurance and provide advice on how to prevent being under insured.

Definition of Under Insurance and the principle of “Average”

Under insurance can be best defined as the situation where your insurance cover - what your insurance policy will pay out in the case of a loss and subsequent claim, is less than what it would cost to replace the lost items. This obviously means that while your insurance payout will help you towards replacing your losses, you will have to partially fund this replacement.

We could also describe under insurance as the occurrence when there is a shortfall between the amount of cover selected and the actual replacement value of what is being insured. The result is that you will only be paid a proportional part of your claim. In the event of a claim the principle of 'average' would then be applied.

What is the principle of “average”?

Average is an insurance principle which has frustrated many insured clients - yet it is a simple and easy one to understand. If an item or property is underinsured, the insured must bear a rateable proportion of each and every loss. Technically, you become your own insurer for the balance of the loss.

Average is applied for three main reasons:

·         To prevent underinsurance.

·         To obtain a full premium for the risk the insurer is carrying.

·        To ensure that each party bears a fair share of each loss.

The formula determining average is as follows:

·         (Sum Insured / Value at Risk) x Amount of Loss

This can be best explained by way of a few examples:

Example 1:

A machine is insured for R10 000. The actual replacement value of the item is R20 000. If the machine was damaged by fire resulting in repairs to the value of R5 000 in repairs, the claims settlement would be calculated as follows:

(R10 000 / R20 000) x R5 000 Amount payable : R2 500

Example 2:

A building is insured for R200 000. The actual reinstatement value of the building is R300 000. If the building was damaged by a hail storm to the value of R60 000 in repairs, the claims settlement would be calculated as follows:

(R200 000 / R300 000) x R60 000 Amount payable : R40 000

Example 3:

You put in a claim for R5 000 worth of damage to your car.

Value of car = R100 000

Insured for = R 80 000

As you are under insured the payout will be calculated as follows:

80 000 x 5000- 100 000 = R 4000

What is the replacement value of goods?

It is important to also understand the term replacement value:

The replacement value of goods is what it would cost you, at the time of a claim, to replace all your belongings with similar brand new ones. If you submit a claim, your insurer will calculate the replacement value you should have insured yourself for. If you insured your belongings for less than that, your insurer will only pay a part of your claim.

Why would a person be under insured?

The reasons for being found under insured can be found both in negligent failure as well as deliberate choice! Both might also be closely related to rising inflation and the cost of insurance.

The rising inflation rate means there's an increasing gap between the (market) value for which you insured your goods and its real replacement value. Your policy may take a 10% inflation increase into account; what happens when this figure rises to 20%? It means that your claim will pay out half of what you expected to get.

Negligent failure
Many people don't realise that they have insured an item (or items) for its market value, not its full replacement value. In this scenario the insurance policy will pay out whatever the market value of the item was set at. Due to inflation this amount will not be enough to replace the item at the current new price (the replacement value), and the policy holder will thus be left in a situation where the insurance payout is not high enough to allow for the replacement of the item.

Many clients are just not prudent when it comes to updating their policies and inventory lists. This is probably the most common sort of under insurance encountered.

Deliberate choice
Sometimes it is just too expensive to insure the items to their full replacement value, and some reason that, while they won't be able to replace the exact item, some sort of financial compensation for their loss is better than none at all. These insured clients under insure their goods in order to save a bit of money on their monthly insurance premiums.

How to avoid:

We would like to share a few suggestions on how to prevent being under insured:

Keep in mind that the replacement values of goods change over time.
If the policy is not reviewed and the higher replacement value is not taken into account, cover becomes inadequate.
You – or an expert - need to make a realistic estimate of the true replacement value of your insurable assets, equipment etc.
You also can't insure an item for something that it's not; you can however insure an item for its replacement.
Update your household inventory list or other list of assets on a regular basis to ensure that any new items are included and to remove items that that you no longer have.
If you fail to list the values of your new DVD player or TV then you would probably not be insured adequately.
It also does not make sense to be paying to insure your old washing machine when you have just replaced it with a new one with a higher value.
Pay special attention to specialized items where specialized insurance is required.
Farmers are advised to regularly review their policies to ensure that natural disasters such as the recent flooding will not bankrupt them. It is best to contact a specialist agricultural broker, who can do a full risk evaluation and give advice on the precautions, potential threats and the insurance required to cover weather and natural disaster-related claims.
We would like to suggest more communication between clients and their brokers or insurance companies. Short Term insurance is not a once-off! You need to review your financial needs regularly to avoid nasty surprises when you have to rely on your insurance policy!
What is Underinsurance?
Underinsurance arises when a party insures something for less than its value
In the event of a loss, parties who underinsure are at risk of being penalised in the amount they are able to recover
Underinsurance is different to self insurance, where a party decides to insure all or part of a risk and where it is clear to all parties from the outset what is covered and what is not.
In many of the articles we publish, we talk about self insurance. However, it is important to understand that self insuring part of a risk is very different to underinsurance.

The insurance text books will tell you that insurance contracts fall under the legal doctrine of “utmost good faith”. In fact some will still use the Latin phrase uberrimae fidei. This means that all parties to an insurance contract must deal in good faith, making a full declaration of all material facts in the insurance proposal. These days most modern wordings or product disclosure statements refer to a Duty of Disclosure.

“But hold on” I hear you say, “I’ve heard people talk about the legal doctrine caveat emptor or ‘let the buyer beware’”. It is true that basic contract law does follow this rule but an insurance contract is treated as being different. This is because when you ask an insurer to cover your business, you home or indeed your life, the presumption is that you know fully about the item to be insured and the insurer knows nothing.

“So what has this to do with underinsurance” you may ask. Let’s look at an example of a retail business with a stock of goods. You purchase insurance to cover the stock in the store (and storeroom or warehouse) to the value of $50,000. The insurer has no knowledge of your stock so it is your duty to disclose the correct stock level and value. The insurer may have an excess on the policy but the assumption is that you are insuring the entire stock … that is the risk that they are accepting and the fundamental basis upon which they calculate the premium to charge.

If the value of the stock at the time of the loss is greater than the value insured on the policy you are underinsured by the difference in value. Say a fire occurred and damaged $25,000 of stock but when it happened you actually had $75,000 of goods on the premises. You might say “that’s ok, we have up to $50k of cover so my $25k is safe”. Sorry, but that is wrong. You cannot be selective and say to the insurer the damaged stock just happened to be in the part which was covered in their $50k and not in the extra $25k part, which was effectively not insured. In exactly the same way, the insurer can’t say my $50k of stock was undamaged and it was your $25k that suffered the loss. There is an assumption that you have insured the full amount of the risk.

According to statistics provided by Insurance Council of Australia an estimated 37% of small businesses do not have adequate insurance cover*. For some this may be a deliberate ploy in an attempt to reduce premiums but for the majority it arises merely because the organisation does not review and update their cover regularly. That $50,000 of stock may have been accurate when the company first started but if the business has grown and / or the value of the stocked items has increased through inflation, in a period of say 5 years the underinsurance can be significant.

Insurers can apply penalties in the case of underinsurance and the amount you can recover from your policy will be reduced. However, most insurers do attempt to help by applying indexed increases to the sums insured each year.

So to summarise, self insurance is a deliberate decision not to insure all or part of a risk and where part of the risk is not insured it is clear to all parties from the outset what is covered and what is not; whereas underinsurance arises where you fail to insure for the full value on the policy (and the insurer assumes it is fully insured).

Gallagher Bassett is a TPA not an insurer and therefore we cannot provide quotations for insurance cover. However if you would like more information on how the various self insured options operate, or you have a self insured program that you think we can assist with, please do not hesitate to contact us.
What is Self Insurance?
Self insurance is a business strategy where an organisation sets aside funds to manage a portion of its own risk, rather than relying on an insurer
Self insurance can be applied to almost any class of risk, including liability, property, motor vehicle and workers’ compensation
Organisations wishing to self insure accept responsibility for claims management, which can be done internally or outsourced to a third party such as Gallagher Bassett
Self insurance is the term used to describe a situation whereby a company opts to retain some of its potential financial risks, rather than to transfer those risks to a third party like an insurance company. In doing so the company chooses to pay its own losses arising from those risks. Generally speaking, the organisation will fund any claims from either its working capital, its general savings or from a specifically established and managed funding reserve.

As an individual, you probably already 'self insure' without actually realising it. Did you turn down that extended warranty offered when you last bought an electrical product or did you choose to pick a larger than standard excess on you motor policy this year? By choosing to run the risk that the electrical item would not break down just after the manufacturer's guarantee period or by extending your vehicle excess to reduce the premium because you believe you are a safe driver, you have consciously made the decision either not to take (or to take reduced) insurance cover and to carry some of the risk personally. The concept is very similar for businesses.

In the Australian business world, the simplest form of self insurance is similar to the concept of you choosing that larger excess on your motor policy; it is called a "deductible". Where you may extend your excess from say $300 to $600, an organisation with a large fleet of vehicles could easily take out a $5000 deductible, or even larger. By doing this the company takes on the responsibility for the small accidents but still has insurance to cover more serious accident repairs, which might be difficult to finance from immediate cash flow.

In fact, it is quite unusual for organisations to completely self insure; in other words to carry 100% of the risk themselves. Even those companies with a strong appetite for risk, and with a healthy balance sheet, tend to have some conventional insurance cover to guard against catastrophic situations. GB acts as claims administrator for a major corporation that self insures in one class of business up to $1,000,000. Any claim that arises below this sum comes out of their own funds; but of course they do not pay premiums to an insurance company, choosing to invest the money saved to create a funding reserve. However, even such a major corporate business has some catastrophe cover.

Perhaps the most common form of self insurance is what is known as a "Self Insured Retention" layer often referred to as an SIR. Following the same concept, the organisation agrees a SIR level with their insurer. In practice this is generally arranged through their broker. It can be arranged for just about any class of business including liability risk, property, motor vehicle etc. It is common place for these arrangements to act in what is termed an "aggregate deductible" basis. Here the organisation limits there risk in two ways rather than one.

Taking the fleet of motor vehicles as an example again, the client may arrange for a deductible of $5000 for each claim but with say a $50,000 aggregate. In this situation not only do they limit their individual claim risk to $5000 per event, once the aggregate value is breached in the 12 month period all additional claims are fully funded by the insurer without the client having to fund another deductible. The important factor here is that this limits the client's total exposure in any one year.

Some organisations go to the extent of setting up their own insurance company which is called a "Captive Insurer". The captive operates in the same way as an insurer but it only has one 'customer' being the self insured Corporation. Of course, that Corporation may have sub-entities and different brands insured within that same captive.

A company choosing to self insure their workers' compensation risk is rather more complex but follows the same basic principles. In this area, there is strict regulatory compliance required before an entity can achieve a self insurance license, to ensure that the workforce is properly protected.

Whichever class of business an organisation chooses to self insure, it is critical capture the details of incidents arising and of claims being made. Those incidents and claims need managing and whilst some organisations set up internal departments to handle these, others engage the services of specialist TPAs to manage their program.
What is underinsurance?
It might be tempting to reduce your business insurance costs by undervaluing your business and its assets, reasoning it’s unlikely you’ll lose everything in one event.

However, underestimating replacement costs when taking out insurance for your small business could backfire on you or even put you out of business if an event such as a fire, storm or earthquake were to occur. Simply put, underinsuring your business can erode your savings and investments, deplete your assets or result in a financial crisis. 

Most business owners insure their contents, stock and buildings against property damage from fire, as the threat is visible. However, problems can arise when the level of cover nominated by the owner is too low.

Underinsurance does give you cheaper business insurance, but only in the short-term. Sure, you’ll pay less for a year or two, but it may come back to bite you –most insurance policies include an ‘underinsurance’ or ‘average’ policy condition. This applies when the sum insured is a certain amount below the actual replacement cost. Depending on the policy, proportionally reduced payments may be made if the insured value is less than 80-85 per cent of the replacement cost.

Take, for example, underinsuring your property. If it’s discovered that your property has been underinsured and your insurer does decide to pay your claim – eg, in the case of a fire or earthquake – the amount paid out will not cover the full loss. As a result, your business will have to fund the shortfall in repair costs.
underinsured motorist coverage

Business interruption insurance is another key area of business insurance that seems to be overlooked. However, this insurance may just save your business if you can’t operate because your premises are damaged by an event such as a storm. Covering you for loss of gross profit, business interruption insurance enables you to pay ongoing and extra business costs to tide you over.

If you have business interruption insurance, it can also be affected by underinsurance when you make a claim, reducing your payouts in proportion to the amount for which your property or stock is underinsured.

Aside from being underinsured, cancelling your public liability insurance is also risky. Tradies who cancel their coverage while on leave or after a contract is finished, but fail to reactivate the policy when they return to a job site, potentially leave themselves open to a liability claim.

Vero has been looking after the insurance needs of Australians for 180 years. Find a broker to learn more about how Vero can protect your business.
An automobile policy option which covers one for property damage and bodily injury caused by another motorist whose coverage is insufficient to cover the damages one has suffered. This policy compensates the injured party for the difference between the injury suffered and the liability covered by the insurance of the driver at fault.
underinsured is a person who Having insufficient insurance coverage.
Risk of underinsurance
Not enough cover

Underinsurance is when you don't have enough insurance to cover all the costs of rebuilding your home. You are considered to be underinsured if your insurance covers less than 90% of the rebuilding costs.

Increasing your insurance cover may not cost very much, and you may even be able to get more cover for the same or a lower price.Why you may be underinsured
Smart tip
Check that you have enough cover each year when you're renewing your insurance or changing insurers.
You could be underinsured because:

It's hard to estimate what it costs to rebuild a home
Your insurance policy may be old (more than 3 years) and you may not have updated the level of cover needed
You may have completed renovations which increase the value of your home
You can also be underinsured for your home contents if you don't have enough home contents insurance to replace your things, especially your jewellery and collections.

Check your policy now
Most people only read their policy when they need to make a claim. Unfortunately, by this time it's often too late. Check your policy now to see how much your insurer will pay and under what circumstances. Also check when your insurer will reject a claim.

When working out how much cover you need, consider the possibility that your whole house could be destroyed, for example, by a bushfire or other natural disaster. Does your policy provide enough insurance to cover the cost of rebuilding your house and any extra costs you might incur? See estimating rebuilding costs and home insurance supplementary costs.

Also see storms and fires for information on insurance for natural disasters.

'Total replacement' policies have less risk
Smart tip
If you have a 'sum insured' home insurance policy, be extra careful when estimating rebuilding cost
Policies with the lowest risk of underinsurance are 'total replacement' policies, where the insurer agrees to pay unlimited replacement costs.

'Sum-insured' policies have a slightly higher risk of underinsurance. You will be underinsured if there is a gap between the estimated rebuilding costs and the actual rebuilding costs.

Some sum-insured policies also offer an 'extended cover' policy that provides up to 30% on top of the sum insured in the event of a total loss - this is a good way to reduce the risk of underinsurance.

Whatever type of home insurance policy you have, there is always a risk of underinsurance. The golden rule is to get enough cover for the worst case scenario.
Definition of OVERINSURANCE. 1 : insurance that exceeds in amount the actual cash value of the property insured. 2 : insurance in a greater amount than the insured can afford.
What is OVERINSURANCE? Having more insurance protection than needed.
 


Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 2

     educational services division. Prior to joining American Fidelity he worked with several companies in the group insurance industry, most recently with Met and Fortis.  MR. ANDRONICO LUCAS CASTILLO: I will give a general perspective on the subject of overinsurance, and then I will discuss why it's an important issue today. Also, I will cover various items that impact overinsurance. In the latest edition of Charles E. Soule's book Disability Income Insurance: The Unique Risk, the author devotes an entire chapter to the subject of overinsurance. I guess from that perspective it is really an important subject.  Many of today's disability underwriting manuals also address overinsurance. In our Munich Reinsurance Underwriting Manual, we define overinsurance as follows: "Overinsurance arises when insurance is carried for a greater amount than insurable interest would justify."   If speculative intent accompanies overinsurance, then anti-selection is created. Overinsurance encourages fraud and malingering since a situation is created where there is insufficient financial incentive for the insured to issue more. The concept of insurable interest signifies that, when a person buys insurance, that person's relationship to the event or object being insured must be such that he or she would suffer a disadvantage from its loss.  Insurable interest in DI lies in the insured's well-being and economic stability, and it is evidence of the insured's continued ability to earn or to generate earned income. Why is the issue of overinsurance important? The underwriters I've talked with generally said that it's not a problem. It used to be. They said they have put in place various measures or controls to limit, or eliminate, the problem. Perhaps the problem is just that. They don't think it is a problem. That said, however, that they think it is a very timely subject, and let me tell you why I think so.  Earlier we heard a speaker talk about the increase in sales that we're currently experiencing in DI. A couple of weeks ago, I also attended the Health Insurance Association of America's Disability Officers Roundtable discussion in Quebec. And just last week I dialed in as a participant in the disability teleforum sponsored by Lehman Brothers, and I think some of you were in that teleforum as well. There seems to be a general feeling that a number of initiatives are already implemented in the areas of product design and marketing, underwriting and claims controls that effectively put in place adequate controls and financial discipline in the operations. As people become satisfied with the implementation of these initiatives, management's attention will now turn more toward growing the business again. After all, we need to pay for the cost that was incurred in setting up this infrastructure. Therefore, it looks like the consensus is that the DI industry is entering its growth phase.  




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 3

     As you may well be aware, the disability industry seems to go through cycles. There always seems to be a delicate balance between growth on one hand and profitability on the other. As we enter into a growth phase, as an industry we should remember the lessons that we have learned. One of the fundamental lessons to remember, as evident or elementary as it may sound, is that an increase in replacement ratios increases claim cost. It's fairly simple.  One of the articles on the topic, which you may want to review, is an article written by Bob Meilander and David Simbro, both from Northwestern Mutual, entitled "The Impact of Replacement Ratios," published in the June 1993 Disability Newsletter. In that article they referred to an SOA study that showed the relationship of claim rates in group long-term disability (LTD) experience to income replacement ratio. Generally this table shows that the lower the income replacement ratio, the lower the actual-to-expected claim ratios. The observation could be made that each 1 percent increase in the replacement ratio leads to roughly a 1 percent increase in claim rates. You can access these reports via the SOA Web site. I'm sure there are more up-to-date studies done by companies using their own data, but I believe the underlying message that this number shows would likely always remain true to a greater or lesser extent.  In that disability newsletter article, the authors also described a Menninger Foundation study that showed, by income replacement ratio, the probability of returning to work after five months of disability. The relationship is almost linear. But in the area of interest to most of us—that is, in the 50–100 percent income replacement range—a very rough rule of thumb is that for every five basis point increase in replacement ratio, the claim termination rates decrease by about three or four points.  What does this result suggest, and what is the potential impact on your replacement for claim costs? You can do the math based on your morbidity assumptions, but I did some rough calculations. I came up with increases in claim cost in the 7–10 percent range, assuming my interest replacement ratios increased by five points. Again, you may come up with different results based on your own data and judgment, but in essence we see the importance of the level of replacement ratios impacting claims experience.  I should mention that Meilander and Simbro, in their article that I just discussed, took some pains to point out that they were avoiding discussing the topic of overinsurance. Rather, they emphasized they were confining their discussion to the impact of increasing replacement ratios on claim cost. They were attempting to confine their discussion to something that is relatively more objective and more quantifiable. On the other hand, we all know that overinsurance is a subjective issue. We cannot avoid a discussion of replacement ratios when we are discussing overinsurance. Also, there is a particular level of replacement ratio that may be considered overinsurance by some, but not by others. They probably all see some maximum dollar amount of disability benefit from all sources that may be 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 4

     considered overinsurance regardless of the person's salary or earnings. Currently, in the market, there is some pressure to push participation limits to higher amounts. How high is too high? I guess that's a question that we need to ponder.  Perhaps it would be interesting to design a survey where we could poll different segments of people in the disability field regarding what overinsurance is, in terms of replacement ratio and maximum benefits. I'm trying to put an objective measure to an otherwise very subjective topic.  Today there is also less stigma associated with being on disability. In fact, you may have heard the anecdote of a claimant overheard during a cocktail party boasting that he collects the benefits, but at the same time still earns a good amount of income from a lucrative contract. The person he was talking to became so envious that he reported these activities promptly to the insurance company. I guess that's not an urban legend—it's true.  The willingness to work is also related to the problem of overinsurance. Stress- related disorders are an increasing concern. The concept of motivational underwriting seems to be gaining ground. Motivational underwriting attempts to measure and assess an applicant's propensity to file a claim or continue out on claim. This is all done based on some set of tools or assessments at application time. Other sources of DI—Social Security, workers compensation, state cash sickness plans, LTD, salary continuance and so on—in fact increase income replacement ratios and, therefore, contribute to the problem of overinsurance.  Fixed contract provisions and fixed benefit amounts, combined with liberal benefits, do not allow us to react to the insured's changing circumstances and, therefore, limit our ability to control overinsurance. We also need to be careful about how we define insurable income in our contracts.  I have an example. This case was interesting from a number of angles. The insured was a successful, self-employed bulldozer operator who bought a $2,000 policy a few years ago. At the time he was earning about $70,000. At the time he bought the policy, he already owned a $1,000 insurance policy and another $500 policy from another insurance company. He therefore had total coverage of about $3,500—an income replacement ratio of 60 percent. So far that does not seem to present any problem. As years passed, he bought additional equipment for his business. As his business grew, he decided to incorporate, and he became an employee of his own firm. This allowed him to decide how much he would earn as salary and also allowed him to designate how much of the corporate income would be paid to him for the corporation's use of his equipment.  The policy's earned income definition seemed to be fairly typical. It included wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, professional fees and other amounts received as compensation for personal services actually rendered. It excluded investment income and amounts received as a pension or retirement allowance. Rental income 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 5

     is typically excluded as well, although his particular policy did not specifically exclude it.  The insured then became disabled from bilateral shoulder pain that severely limited his ability to do his work. He definitely was disabled. The issue that arose was when the insurer calculated his earned income prior to his disability. The reported W2 wage amounted to only $14,000. This being the case, the insurer then invoked the relation of earnings to insurance clause to reduce his benefits. The insured, however, contended through his lawyers that if one closely examined the insured's income tax returns and understood the nature of the corporate entity, his appropriate earned income should include the rental income, and when done that way, the relation of earnings to insurance clause had no bearing. Therefore, he should receive the full policy benefits.  This is an actual case and is still ongoing. The last I heard, the claims department of the insurance company had asked for the disabled claimant's most recent tax return. Apparently, the latest tax return still shows that he's making some rental income.  In determining insurable earned income, we need to look at net after-tax income, as well as nondiscretionary or nondisposable income. In Chart 1, we graphed each company's issue and participation (I&P) limits by gross annual income, and compared it against the net after-tax income. The nondiscretionary income was assumed to be at 60 percent of net after-tax income, and alternatively the nondiscretionary income was assumed to be 85 percent of net after-tax income.  We estimated the average deductions that would have been taken by individuals from their tax return to get the net after-tax income. Apparently, you can obtain the actual average deductions taken from the IRS. With the nondiscretionary curves that we developed, perhaps the 80 percent factor is more applicable at the lower income levels, and the 60 percent factor may be more applicable at the higher income levels. As I mentioned before, the subject of overinsurance is quite subjective. With this in mind, this graph seems to show that some companies at some income levels have relatively liberal I&P limits.  I should caution everyone about using this graph in actual practice. For more on the calculation you need to calculate net after-tax income that is more in line with your target market. I do not know if the IRS breaks down their data into finer cuts, such as by occupation, but it's probably worth exploring a little bit further.  Once you have calculated the net after-tax income, you then need to decide where to position your I&P limits in relation to the net after-tax income, and to what extent you're comfortable in replacing the nondisposable income upon disability, or the factors such as competition, your policy design and richness, your contract features and your target market. Underwriting and claims practice also come into play as you think about where to position your I&P limits. Another factor that can 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 6

     have an impact on the problem of overinsurance occurs when an insured changes careers. The net worth of the insured and the amount of unearned income he or she receives also may have a bearing on potential overinsurance.  The existence of other specialty-type coverages that the insured has is also significant. In case you're not aware, there are specialty high-limit coverages over and above our current participation limits that are available through companies such as Lloyd's. Also, stacking coverages such as voluntary group LTD offerings, in which it is typical that the applications on these offerings do not ask for other coverage in force, provides the potential for overinsurance to take place. A potential overinsurance situation can also occur in multilife cases, where, as an example, the case may start out as an employer-paid plan and, therefore, be allowed higher issue limits, but then change to a full employee-pay-all plan. There's a potential for overinsurance in that respect.  The next two examples I have are actual cases. The first one actually is from someone I know who got downsized but was lucky enough to find a position in another division of the same firm he works for. At the time he thought that he was going to be downsized, he applied for individual DI coverage. He was able to get an extra $2,000 on top of his $5,000 LTD. So in essence, he has a fairly rich replacement ratio. I think this case of overinsurance is probably attributable to the underwriter being asleep at the wheel.  The second case that I have is also an actual case. It involves a person I've known for quite some time who was a chief financial officer for a group physician practice. He told me a few months ago that they were looking into their benefits package and had their broker solicit bids. He said that they got a bid from a carrier who really wanted their business, and apparently they offered an additional 5 percent of income replacement to get the business. He told me he could not recall who the carrier was, but I think I'll probably remind myself to give him a call back and see if he can remember who it was.  MR. HOWARD L. ROSEN: Just so I have a point of reference, how many of your companies are in individual DI? Good. How many of your companies who are not in DI want to be in DI? And no hands go up.  First of all, let me give you a profile of Union Central. Union Central is a company that was established in 1867. It's not my fault, but it's a company that very few people have ever heard of. It is a mutual life insurance company, and the last time I looked we were the tenth largest mutual company by assets. That's kind of by default, because the companies above us seem to either convert to stock or combine. I guess if we wait long enough we might be in the top five.  We are, as a corporation, very focused on three target markets: the upwardly mobile, the independently wealthy and the small business owner. As far as the independently wealthy, they set themselves apart from the individual DI 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 7

     marketplace, because they have sufficient assets to liquidate in time of disability. Typically if you're independently wealthy, and I'll get into what I mean by that in underwriting considerations, you're not going to be in the market for DI.  We distribute our DI product through multiple distribution channels. First of all, we grew up as a general agency company, so our core distribution is general agency, not a branch office in any way. We do have a couple of remnants of the branch office system, but we primarily distribute through a small entrepreneurial general agency system. Second, we distribute through what we call our DI centers. This is an owned or branch-type brokerage with a very modest model—a single DI manager, a brokerage manager and an office assistant. One of the things that we're doing right now is looking at expanding that model both horizontally with a rep increasing the ability to write out of a single agency, and increasing that vertically by getting more points of distribution. Finally, the last way that we distribute our DI product is by growing into a brokerage general agency system. We have multiple tentacles out there. The only way you can grow in this industry is to be able to grow through multiple distribution channels, because you have to think that when you deal with brokers, generally speaking, a broker selling your product is somebody else's general agent who couldn't get it with their own company.  Within Union Central, DI is an independent self-supporting line. Many years ago it was looked upon as an accommodation line. In the last several years we've changed that so that it has its own internal rate of return. It has its own income, revenue and expense alignment goals. Quite honestly, over the last few years, within the context of Union Central, it has been a very effective and successful line of business.  We've been in the individual DI business since 1966. But for about the first 25, actually almost 30, years, the company didn't make a nickel in individual DI. We lost money every year. In the early 1990s, the company did an introspective look, using outside consultants, at whether or not we should stay in the DI business. The questions that we asked ourselves were really should we stay in as a manufacturer and a distributor, which we were, as just one or the other, or should we pull the plug completely and get out of DI? We decided to stay in the business as both a manufacturer and a distributor, because we felt that we had the core competency to continue to grow the line successfully. As a result of that look, we took several actions in our DI business, to guard against the overinsurance issue. These were in direct response to concerns about overinsurance and some of the things that we saw in our actual experience.  We lowered our I&P limits. We stopped being in the business of writing $25,000–35,000 a month on professionals whose incomes conceptually justified it. Think about what you do when you offer somebody the opportunity to retire on $360,000 of DI benefits that are tax-free. We started requiring financial documentation. Up to a few years ago, not only did we, as well as many other companies in the business, not require financial documentation in order to write a DI case, but we even gave a 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 8

     discount if you supplied it. We eliminated lifetime benefits. We, as did other companies in the business, wrote significant amounts of lifetime benefits as a rider on top of our existing base coverage.  If you think about individual DI, and you look at it as a coverage that protects earned income during the income-earning years, the concept of lifetime benefits is alien. We looked at that, and it was an easy decision. In the analysis that we do in our actuarial department, we can clearly discern a difference in loss ratios between policies with and without lifetime benefits. So it became a no-brainer to stop writing the rider.  On our inflation rider or cost-of-living adjustment (COLA), we lowered the maximum benefit and reduced the floor on increases. Why have a floor on the increase and benefits in pay status if you're in a noninflationary economy? Finally, we limited the availability of the residual rider, because of the potential overinsurance impact it could have on certain earners.  Now, having done that to our entire block, we looked forward as we designed new product forms and a new chassis. We do a lot of things now with respect to the overinsurance issue. We deal with it within the context of product structure. We deal with it in the underwriting department and in the claims department. Finally, and this may be somewhat counterintuitive also, we deal with it through our distribution department and the fact that we believe that DI is a relationship-based sale.  First of all, I'll talk about product structure. A lot of the things that we did were in direct response to an analysis of expected or actual policyholder behavior. With respect to a guaranteed insurability rider, which allows policyholders to increase their coverage periodically without any medical underwriting with just the benefit of financial underwriting, we limited the total amount of the options that one could take. We also limited each option, again reducing the opportunity for anti-selective behavior. Now, our rider is a little different than many riders that are out there. Some riders allow the options to be exercised every three years, sometimes with life-cycle events. Our rider can be exercised every year, but we do have the total limits, and we have the inside limits on the amount that can be exercised every year. The total amount that we will allow to be exercised is twice the original base amount issued, and the amount that we will allow to be exercised at each option date is half of the original amount issued. We also put a limit on the maximum exercise age, because again you get into certain types of anti-selective behavior increasing the benefit as much as possible in anticipation of a claim. We also use current financial underwriting requirements as opposed to underwriting requirements that were in place at the time that the policy was issued.  We link our COLA rider, which increases benefits that are in pay status as a result of the increase of some external index, to the Urban Consumer Price Index (CPI-U), as opposed to just the CPI, because we felt that that was a logical link to the 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 9

     expenses that occur during the life of a claim. We changed from a higher maximum amount and a floor to a 6 percent maximum amount and a 0 percent floor. Even now there are some riders out there that have a floor of 1, 2 or 3 percent. Why increase a benefit in pay status if you're in a noninflationary economy?  We looked at our social insurance supplement rider also. This is a rider that is added on to the base coverage and will pay if social programs do not pay. We changed the structure of the rider to a dollar-for-dollar offset with federal, state and local disability programs. We felt that resulted in a direct correlation between benefits received or not received from government programs. Also, the rider will not pay if the insured is otherwise gainfully employed. If the claimant is somehow collecting a government benefit, but is otherwise gainfully employed, the rider will not pay.  I'll next address the definition of disability. Our prior product series was kind of a one-size-fits-all type of product. If you had an occupation of X, this is the contract and the definition that we offered. In the white-collar market, which is where Union Central sells, that generally meant a long-term own-occupation definition. Well, if you have it there and you're going to sell it, somebody is going to buy it. People who understand the coverage, in many cases, are going to buy it, because they may have the opportunity to use it and double dip. With our current series, we offer up to six definitions of disability. And while we still offer a pure own-occupation definition, we try to limit it with respect to certain occupations and especially ages within occupations.  We do have a relation of benefits to earnings rider. It was filed and approved in every state. We do not use it. We have found in our claims analysis that this type of overinsurance has not been a problem for us. It's good that we have it in reserve so that if we start seeing some measure of abuse and want to guard for it within the context of new business, we can do that. The other issue that we found is that none of our competition seems to have it either. You can cut off your nose to spite your face by putting a limitation that the field of competition is going to exploit when they compare your policy, as they certainly will.  Now, lastly on product structure, this is an idea that is on our drawing board. It's a little complex, and I believe one other company may have it. It's a conditionally renewable rider, and it's used only in the context of employer-paid cases. If you look at issue and participation limits and the implicit replacement ratios that result from those I&P limits, certainly you know that the amount of business that companies will issue in an employee-paid situation is less than that which they will issue in an employer-paid situation. This is because if the business is employer-paid, the benefits are taxable. But if you look at the after-tax replacement ratios that result from a typical company's employer-paid versus employee-paid replacement ratios, what you'll find is that after-tax ratios in the employer-paid side are lower than the after-tax ratios in the employee-paid side of the house. Part of the reason behind that is there is a concern, and I think Andy touched on it, that 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 10

     the payor status of employer-paid benefits could change. So if you have a high benefit amount that is correct on an after-tax basis for an employer-paid situation, if that employee leaves the employ of the company but is offered the option of continuing the policy by paying the premium out of their own funds, the individual will probably take the policy, because older policies are valuable. But all of a sudden the replacement ratio changes, because the tax status of the benefits change. So there is a certain amount of concern about that.  Suppose for that corridor between the employee-paid after-tax replacement ratio and the equivalent employer-paid after-tax replacement ratio, you added a conditionally renewable rider that makes up the difference so that the replacement ratios are the same. If the payor status of the policy changes, that's a condition necessary for the rider to terminate. Now all of a sudden you're back where you were before you had the extra coverage. So this is on our drawing board. We've actually floated this as a trial balloon to several insurance departments. We found that some of those insurance departments grabbed onto it and understood. The factor to cause us concern is that most of the insurance departments gave responses that clearly demonstrated that they didn't have a clue what was going on. And that is a real concern.  Now I'm going to discuss underwriting and the use of financials. I mentioned the fact that we now require financials on all of our individually issued business. We look very carefully at other insurance in force. We want to look at all sources of insurance, whether it's insured or self-insured. Now, what do I mean by that? I mean unearned income. We reduce our issue and participation limits by one-half of the monthly unearned income in excess of $20,000 a year. Why? Because if an individual has a stream of unearned income that will flow whether or not that individual is disabled, there is a reduction of the incentive to return to work. Closely associated with that, we'll look at net worth, and we'll look at the liquidity of that net worth. It's one thing if an individual has high net worth as a result of owning three office buildings that are highly illiquid. It's another thing if that individual has $4 million dollars of liquid assets that can be turned into an income stream.  I'd like to go into more detail about I&P limits. Any time you talk about DI experience, the replacement ratio is the key. The replacement ratios that result from our I&P tables vary by income level. They vary between employee and employer payor. They vary between with and without LTD, and we also have lower issue limits in the medical market. Now let's see what those mean in actual practice.  I built Table 1 from our I&P tables. As you can see, this table demonstrates all of the points that I just made. You can see that the maximum replacement ratios are different between employee- and employer-pay. Those replacement ratios decline as income increases primarily because, as income increases, discretionary income increases. They change between group and individual. You can see that, as income goes up, in every case replacement ratios go down. 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 11

     Table 1  

UnderwritingUnderwriting•Maximum Replacement RatiosEarnedIncome   $ 50,000100,000150,000200,000250,000300,000   EmployeePay

   69%58%49%45%40%37%   EmployerPay   80%71%62%57%50%47%   EmployeePay   71%62%62%61%59%58%   EmployerPay   82%75%75%75%72%70%   Individual OnlyGroup/Individual   Next, I'll talk about claims administration. How can you prevent overinsurance in claims administration? Well, the magic is in the two-year contestable period. We do consider the duties and sources of income at the time of claim. We consider all the duties and all of the earned income at time of claim. So you may have a physician who owns two or three individual practices but has his own practice as well. He's deriving income from sources of ownership and management as well as from his individual practice. If that individual became disabled but shifted his time and emphasis between the individual practice and managing the other practices, but after the physical loss had the same or more income as before, you have no claim. There may be a physical disability, but there is no loss of income, and so you have to look at that very carefully. Again, the important point is a review of contestable claims.  Now, our field wants us to show that we are easier and easier to do business with. Don't keep asking for medical documentation. Don't ask for all the tax returns. Now, what does that mean? Sometimes it means that the information that we get during the underwriting process is not of the highest quality. At the same time, at the time of claim, that same field associate is going to say, "My client is disabled, so please don't hassle him about tax returns and medical, and all that other stuff that you have the right to." Well, you know what? It is our contractual right. It's in the contract for a reason, and we take advantage of that. We take advantage of that not to look for ways of not paying claims, but to look for ways of paying claims 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 12

     that are appropriate. We have found some very strange things. I have an example case that I want to use.  We had an insured who applied for and received a DI policy in 1998. Within two years, the insured had incurred a claim. During the claim adjudication, we requested actual tax returns, and we got the approval to go to the IRS and get copies of actual tax returns for the years 1996–99. Now again, we're in the contestable period. When we looked back at the underwriting file, because we were trying to be easier to do business with on the sales end, we found some really interesting stuff in the documentation that the insured submitted. It appeared as if in 1998 his income was $102,000; in 1997 it was $80,000; and in 1996 it was $100,000, fairly steady—maybe there was some bonus income that went up and down. When we looked at the tax returns obtained during the contestable review, we saw that in 1998 there was actually a business loss. In 1997 the income was $34,000, and in 1996 the income was close to what he disclosed. But based on the information that we obtained during the contestable review we denied the claim, rescinded the policy, and refunded the premium. While this may be termed underwriting at the time of claim, this is truly a form of guarding against overinsurance.  Finally, I mentioned that it is possible to work through your distribution channels and guard against overinsurance. But the key in this particular situation is that you have to have a relationship-based sales mechanism. The people who sell your policies are the front line of defense against overinsurance. So if you believe as we do that DI is a relationship-based sale, not only should the producer have a relationship with the insured, and be able to evaluate whether or not the information supplied during the underwriting process is accurate and fair, but the company should also have a relationship with that producer, so that the producer feels a sense of loyalty in working for not only the best interests of his or her client, but also the company that the producer represents. We truly feel that DI has to be a relationship-based sale with a real person sitting eyeball to eyeball with the insured, and that person must have a strong relationship with the company.  While we are doing all these things, as are most of our competition, the key to the continuation of individual DI marching back toward a consistent level of profitability is making sure that we don't repeat the sins of the past, and guarding against overinsurance is, we hope, the way that we can do that.  MR. MARK D. SCHWISOW: As an anecdote, a few years ago I was with another company. We did some focus groups on voluntary disability, on a group platform, and went out and solicited input from three groups of people: (1) the brokers, (2) the employers and (3) the employees themselves. The employees were the most interesting of the three groups, because what we learned from them is an appropriate disability plan should pay benefits starting at the first day of disability for life, covering 100 percent of predisability earnings, should pay your medical bills and should also be dirt cheap. Overinsurance, I guess, is in the eye of the beholder. 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 13

     With that, let me give you a little bit of background about my company. I have been with American Fidelity for about nine months. It's a medium-sized insurance company based in Oklahoma City. Our primary distribution arm is a captive sales force; we compensate them via a base salary and a sales bonus. The initial sale that we make is to the employer, and that gives us an entrée into the group to do work-site sales to all of the employees in the group.  Our main product offerings are DI, cancer, annuities and a little bit of supplemental medical business. We do not sell any sort of comprehensive PPO- or HMO-type medical plans. We do sell a little bit of life insurance, on both a group and an individual platform. About seven or eight years ago, American Fidelity decided to have a separate division to focus on the educational market including school groups, colleges, universities, education associations. I am now the pricing actuary for that group.  Since we're in the education market, with the exception of the support staff such as bus drivers, cafeteria workers and custodians, most of our insureds are well educated. They're white-collar employees. Salaries are moderate; average income for educators is about $43,000 per year. We have very few monthly indemnities that would range above $5,000 just because, with the exception of a few principals and superintendents, there just aren't that many high earners within the education field. Unlike Howard, we don't worry too much about net worth. My wife actually works in education, and she tells me there aren't too many independently wealthy teachers out there.  As far as the product goes, we're unique in the industry. Most of the business is sold with very short elimination periods. Fifteen days or fewer is the norm, and we have a lot of first-day accident business on the books. Some of the business is short duration—typically a traditional six-month benefit plan—but a lot of it will go to age 65. It's sold in $100 increments. What this means is while we typically sell a 60 percent plan, in reality most people aren't going to be getting 60 percent; they'll be getting 55 percent, 58 percent, just because the math works out that way.  Below a certain benefit level, we're selling not subject to insurability. We have a few knock-out questions. If you have a dread disease, or a few very specific diagnoses, we're not going to insure you. Beyond that, if you want higher amounts, you're going to have to supply insurability information. If you do go into underwriting and you don't pass, we will still issue you the not-subject-to-underwriting amount, and we will apply preexisting conditions and limitations as appropriate.  As far as the benefits go, we offset against Social Security and workers compensation. We also have the teacher retirement systems, which are a major offset for us. This comes up in virtually all states, and it does vary by state. I'm not sure if any of you are aware of the plans. They are all unique. Most of these benefits are not subject to federal income tax because they are sold with posttax dollars, out of the employee's pocket. We do have a little bit of Section 125 




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 14

     business—that would be an exception where it would be a taxable benefit. With very few exceptions, all of our cases are sold on a list-bill basis. We will, on a monthly basis, issue a premium statement, and the districts have to go through and do the traditional adds and drops and things of that sort.  Our field force is compensated on new sales. They do not get anything for selling a rate increase. They do get something if they sell a benefit increase. If somebody is at a $1,000 of monthly indemnity and they go to $1,200, the field will be compensated on the additional indemnity sold. But if we put in a rate increase, the field gets nothing for that.  Here's what I call overinsuring by underinsuring. There are several reasons why we've seen this come up. One is the not-subject-to-underwriting limit. There are many situations where the employee may not think they can make it through underwriting, and they would prefer not to take the chance, so they'll just go ahead and buy up to the not-subject-to-underwriting limit. The account reps in our company in some situations may encourage that, much as we don't like that to happen. They know what things are going to get knocked out, so they'll act as an intermediary and assist the educator in making that decision of whether or not to go to an indemnity level that is subject to underwriting.  The second issue, of course, is cost. There are many situations where the account rep will say, "You're eligible for $1,200 a month." And the person will say, "Well, I don't want to pay that." And we end up with situations where the individual may say, "I'll buy $1,000 a month." Now all of a sudden they're not buying full 60 percent of salary; they're buying something in the 40–50 percent range.  Of course, the other issue is that each of these plans is sold just once, and unless you go back and sell that benefit amount increase over the course of a couple of years, your income is going to go up while the benefit amount is not increasing.  So what does this do to us? Well, the main thing it does is reduce the benefit that we pay to a minimum benefit. The majority of our plans are $100 monthly minimum benefit plans. After the first year when all the offsets kick in—the teacher retirement, Social Security, etc.—these people may well be receiving a $100 monthly indemnity. From a premium perspective it doesn't matter to them whether they bought a $1,000 plan or a $1,200 plan, they're still getting $100. From our perspective we're compromised, because we're not getting the premium on the extra, say, $200 of monthly indemnity. And we did not price it that way, so we have a problem.  Then we also have an expense issue that goes along with it. We basically priced this product assuming people are going to be buying 60 percent. If they don't, the unit costs tend to be a higher percentage of premium, so we end up losing on the expense side as well.  




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 15

     I'll next talk about some of the solutions. Our official position is all new sales must be within $200 brackets of the maximum allowable. So if you're eligible for $1,200, you can buy $1,000, but you can't buy $900. We try to encourage the account reps to keep to this. It doesn't always happen. That's really an issue that we have to keep on top of to make sure that we're not slipping on it.  Once again, we have to make to sure that, if the teacher is eligible for the higher indemnity, they actually do purchase it. This requires annual reservicing and going out and talking to the people and telling them they're eligible for this additional benefit. We'd like them to purchase it. Every once in a while we'll do amnesties where we'll say, "We'll let you buy additional coverage not subject to insurability, although there will be pre-X associated with that." We try to do that to get the monthly indemnity amounts up. As you know, I haven't been with American Fidelity all that long, but if we try all these steps and we're just not succeeding, then the natural conclusion is we're going to have to begin to rate for it.  Another area is two-income families for overinsurance. Being in the education market, the majority of our clientele are females. And there's a greater likelihood they are two-income families, and in those situations when you begin to factor in childcare and a number of other things, it's possible that the reduced disability benefit will support a two-income family. When you take a second income, which is taxed at a fairly high rate, and remove that and replace it with a disability benefit, the taxability issue is even greater than with a single-income situation. Cost of living or quality of living-wise, you may not be that much worse off after disability.  As an anecdote, we had a situation in a company I was with a few years ago, a group of commodity traders. They were an interesting bunch. We made a lot of mistakes that, Howard, you'd probably appreciate in terms of not getting the correct tax information from them. Essentially it turned out to be a group of people who knew how to work the system. They would come up with tinnitus ear problems, and all of a sudden their spouses were trading for them. They would trade on the telephone. And, of course, the problem we ran into as well is that commodity traders are pretty high-energy, on-the-edge people, and they came to us as a group and said, "We have this contract. You're going to pay us, and just try to stop us." It was a very difficult thing.  We write a number of plans that provide no offset for the first 12 or up to 24 months of disability. That certainly is going to provide a situation for double-dipping. Sick leave is another one. If we're not rigorous in terms of determining how much sick leave these individuals have, we're likely to be overinsuring for a period of time. Our account reps are also very good about identifying potential maternity issues, basically suggesting that if an insured is going to have a child, they should purchase this plan, as it will pay when the insured is out on maternity leave.  




Managing the Overinsurance Risk for Disability Insurance 16

     In conclusion, overinsurance is a fact of life in the voluntary market. The best we're going to be able to do is manage it, not eliminate it. I think our situation is unique given the way that we market and our industry niche, but I think everyone has to look at his or her own experience and come up with conclusions on how to address it. I believe that active management is a must. You have to keep on top of overinsurance issues and make sure your premiums are appropriate for the situation.  MS. MITCHELL: Thank you all for your presentations. I'm going to open the floor up for any questions or comments. If you have a question please step up to the microphone and state your name.  MS. DEBRA SUE LIEBESKIND: I have a question regarding the education marketplace. What have you been seeing in terms of claim seasonality in the summer?  MR. SCHWISOW: You have to be actively at work in order to make a claim, so by definition we see a much lower incidence in the summer months. Incidence during the fall is not as high as in the spring. The first five months of the year tend to be the worst.  MS. LIEBESKIND: I have another question regarding the follow-up to getting benefit levels increased over time. Have you done that in any other fashion aside from face-to-face marketing?  MR. SCHWISOW: Our primary method is to sit people down in a one-on-one setting and talk through the product availability. This is much as the old individual life salesman would have done in the past. We're doing a little bit of Internet stuff, but we are more face-to-face.  MS. MITCHELL: I have one question for Howard. You briefly mentioned that you're careful about who you give the residual rider to. Can you elaborate a little bit as to why?  MR. ROSEN: There are some occupations where we are very careful, for example, real estate agents. Any time you have a situation where the insured can manipulate his or her income in a residual situation, the insured will do so. If you're on an other-than-salary basis, such as a commission basis, and you anticipate a claim occurring, you can push all of your income to just prior to what you will claim as the onset of disability, so that immediately after you have a huge loss of income. Therefore, the residual benefit will be greater. Now, this isn't something that happens with every insured who has the opportunity, but don't forget that it only takes a couple of extra claims to throw your DI line out of kilter. If you give someone the opportunity, or if you give your entire population the opportunity to select against you, some will.  

Situation where an insured has bought so much coverage that it exceeds the actual cash value (or the replacement cost) of the risk or property insured. For the insurance company overinsurance constitutes a moral hazard because the insured (overinsured) may be tempted to make a false claim to profit from a loss.
Aggregation 
Demystifying Disability 
Underinsurance is a much bigger problem than over-insurance. In 2007 a South African study found that many families did not have disability cover. They may be financially ruined if illness or an injury impacts on a breadwinner's ability to work. North-American studies indicate a similar picture of under-insurance. 
Despite this general trend, insurers sometimes deal with individual cases of over-insurance. In this article we shed light on the implications of having too much disability insurance and how insurers approach the issue. 
What is over-insurance? Disability insurance is different from the claims against the Road Accident Fund that we read about in newspapers. In that case, the cost of past and future medical treatment and rehabilitation as well as the potential loss of income may be included in the claim amount. Disability insurance provides income protection based on the person's current income. Different insurance products and medical aid provide for the other financial impacts of illness or injury. 
Though no amount of money can adequately compensate for the impact of health problems on a person's life, disability cover focuses on maintaining their current level of income. 
Why is over-insurance a problem? If a policy provides for excessive benefits, or a person has multiple policies, disablement could result in a total benefit that is higher than the usual income of the claimant. 
Insurance should not be a financial gamble - death or disability should not result in a person "winning the jackpot". It also opens the doors to fraud if the cover is higher than the value of that which is insured. 
An insured person should not be better off financially after disability than before. 
Response to over-insurance Group insurers rarely see cases of over-insurance. Each possible case is managed based on the principles of aggregation agreed by the industry and available on http://www.asisa.co.za. 
In essence, where there is clear evidence of over-insurance, a claimant's total benefit from different insurers should be reduced. Each insurer's benefit is reduced proportionately. 
Although this may sound simple in theory, in practice one would need to consider a variety of factors for each specific case, e.g. different disability definitions, the age when payments stop and escalation. 
Lump sum disability benefits as well as disability income benefits are taken into consideration since both are seen as income protection policies. To compare like with like, lump sum benefits are converted into equivalent monthly benefits based on an age-related approach. 
Critical Illness products on the other hand are not included in this calculation as they have a different focus and are not dependent on a person's ability to work. 
Insurers may have individual approaches to aggregation, so it's important to read the policy wording to know what to expect. 
How to avoid over-insurance Limiting benefits at claims stage is not ideal. It is better to pitch cover at the right level by using a sound financial planning process, which is based on thorough needs analysis. 
Individuals should take some time to assess their financial needs and goals with the help of a professional adviser. They will need to understand the group assurance cover they have and whether it can be converted to individual insurance when they leave the employer. 
Prevention is better than cure. It will help avoid cases where benefits need to be limited, or even worse, where too little insurance leaves people financially vulnerable. 
Under/Over insurance and risks involved
Under/Over insurance and risks involved
One of the biggest risk in the Short Term Insurance Industry for you as client, is being under insured. There are so many client’s under insured in South Africa and they don’t even know. The biggest reason for this, is due to the fact that clients doesn’t understand what being under insured means. In this article I will focus on two areas where this is commonly seen, Building Insurance and Household Content.

Building Insurance:
Covers the main structure of your home and all fixture, i.e. geysers, solar panels. When you buy a home for R10 million, it´s important to remember that the price includes the value of the plot as well. Insurance companies will only pay to rebuild the house and for the rubble re-movement. The best way to calculate the correct amount to insure your house for, is to take the size of the house and multiply it by the amount it would cost to rebuild it per square meter (m²).

For example:

House size: 400m²

Price per m²: R15 000 (going rate for exclusive properties)

Replacement value: R6 000 000

Add rubble re-movement cost: R1 000 000 (estimated cost)

Total: R7 000 000

Insured value was for R10 000 000 and the replacement value estimated at R7 000 000. You as the client paid for R3 000 000 cover, you didn’t need. This quit an extensive exercise, just to make sure your property is correctly insured. Please keep in mind, that after all the calculations you might still be under insured or over insured. Might there be a solution for this problem….? Keep reading and I’ll tell you.

Household Content Insurance:
This will cover all the items in your house which is not a fixture, i.e. if you flip your house upside down, everything that falls on the floor is household content. Content is a very difficult section to estimate the correct value. The first thing to keep in mind is that you have to work on replacement value. Not the value you bought the item for, but what it will cost to replace. One of the biggest area of concern is the replacement cost of clothing. Most clients under value the replacement cost of their clothing. Here is a quick example of what the effect would be if you are under insured:

Insured value: R1 000 000

Real replacement value: R1 500 000

Claim submitted: R 200 000

Insurance payout: R200 000 x (R1 000 000 /R1 500 000) = R200 000 x 0.667 = R133 400

Short Fall on claim: R66 600

This a big area of concern for both client and insurer. The premium difference for R1 000 000 to R1 500 000 won’t be that great, but you are losing out on 33.3% on every claim.

Good news:
There has to be way, to take the risk of under- and over insurance out of you as the client’s hands. Well there is, there are insurance companies that has their own valuators. These valuators will come to your house and make a full assessment on your building and household content. The insurance company will then with your help insure that your have the correct insured amounts. No questions will be asked when you claim, no assessor will come to your home when you have a claim. Isn’t that what all of us want? It MIGHT be that your premium is higher, but can you put a price on such an innovation in the industry…? (The word, might is in capital letters, because it is not always more expensive)
When providing quotes for property insurance here at Highhouse we often come across enquiries where people are unsure about true values for either their buildings sum insured (BSI) or contents sum insured (CSI) and have never really taken stock of what assets they own and how much it would cost to replace everything in a worse case scenario such as a fire or flood, where everything could be damaged or lost.

When you guess or base your insurable values on inaccurate or incorrect figures, this can lead to either over insurance or underinsurance. The stresses and strain of having to deal with a worse case scenario and picking up the pieces for your family could be further worsened if you find yourself thousands of pounds out of pocket and unable to replace half of what is needed to start up again.
Overinsurance means the insured is paying too much for the cover required  and would save money by reevaluating the correct values. It is also possible you may have an item insured more than once under different types of policy such as home insurance and insurance cover through banks and credit cards.

An example of where a property might be over insured is where they have based their BSI on the market value of the property and not the rebuild cost which is usually less (except in circumstances such as some listed properties) as it excludes the value of the land the property is built on.

An Example of where contents might be overinsured is an evaluation of items that had a higher value a few years but have since gone down in price. Remember its not the price you paid for something that you are insuring but rather the cost of replacing it like for like and with advances in technology making appliances and devices cheaper, their cost to replace is also reducing.

Tips on preventing being overinsured

Don’t guess or purposely evaluate an item to be worth more than it is especially to the extent where you think you would make a profit by doing this, insurance companies and in particular loss adjusters are very good at determining an accurate value of items and it is in your interest to do the same.
Don’t do an evaluation of how much buildings and contents cost in the first year of insurance and then never do it again. It may be unrealistic to expect people to evaluate everything every year but remember that what you own collectively and insure in year 1 isn’t going to be the same as in year 10. For high value listed items on an insurance policy, you should keep the insurance company notified when you sell them, if they are damaged (but you don’t claim) or if their value has dropped significantly.
Check that your possessions aren’t insured over several different policies. Banks these days often offer a premium service for monthly fee which may include phone and gadget insurance as well. Ideally it is not worth claiming for a phone or small electrical items as a singular claim on your home insurance because losing a no claims bonus and an increase in premium can out way the benefits of the claim in the long term. That said it is worth noting when items are insured and with whom because you may be paying for a separate phone insurance policy when you already have insurance with your bank.
Underinsurance



Underinsurance is where the sums insured are inadequate and the insured will usually only become aware of this when it is too late and a claim has been made only to find out that the final settlement is far less than the accurate cost of replacing lost or damaged property. The sums insured for buildings should be the full value of a complete rebuild and remember that it is the maximum figure that the insurer will pay out.

An example of underinsurance for buildings is when a property rebuild value has increased because either renovation work and/ or extensions have been built or in the case of listed buildings, the cost of listed building materials have increased faster than the protective index-linked rate.

An example of underinsurance for contents is when the insured sets a CSI based on a blanket figure to take into account the cost of replacing big items they would like to have cover for such as fridge/ freezers, cookers, TV’s, computers, beds and basic furniture including carpets. This does however fail to take into account a true reflection of what may have to be replaced and its the smaller items such as smaller electrical appliances, DVD’s, CD’s, crockery, cutlery, pots and pans, curtains, blinds, mirrors, bed linen, clothing, ornaments and so on. By listing everything in a room and adding up their values, its amazing what the actual cost of replacing like for like really could be.

Tips on preventing becoming underinsured

For Buildings – The sum insured should be the cost of a full rebuild which in the worse case scenario of a fire may include the cost of demolition, debris removal, architects fees, surveyors and legal fees and of course the rebuild itself.
For Contents – go thoroughly through each room and note as many items as possible, creating a checklist with a full replacement value for each item, think of the worse case scenario and you had to replace everything and therefore you want to have the correct sums to be able to do this. Remember to include contents from the garden and outbuildings and create a list that can be reused or changed to make the process of updating easier in the future. We have put together a sample checklist later in this guide to help get you started.
Heirloom items, antiques, jewellery, fine arts and other expensive items should be correctly evaluated by properly qualified valuers to their full market or current market value depending on the piece and be aware of any market trends that may affect their value.
Where an insurance company will not dispute you owning a washing machine or television in the spare bedroom, they may however require evidence of ownership or proof of existence for more expensive ‘specified items’ like jewellery or antiques. Keeping photographic evidence and as much proof of ownership as you can in a safe place will help, should a claim arise in the future. Ideally a backup of proof should be safely stored away from the property in case of a fire where all evidence could be lost as well.
Don’t take out insurance and then forget about any endorsements or exclusions that have been applied to the policy. For example some insurers apply a safe clause endorsement for specified items such as rings or necklaces and will not cover theft of jewellery from the home unless it is kept locked in a safe whilst not being worn.

Overinsurance



Overinsurance means the insured is paying too much for the cover required  and would save money by reevaluating the correct values. It is also possible you may have an item insured more than once under different types of policy such as home insurance and insurance cover through banks and credit cards.

An example of where a property might be over insured is where they have based their BSI on the market value of the property and not the rebuild cost which is usually less (except in circumstances such as some listed properties) as it excludes the value of the land the property is built on.

An Example of where contents might be overinsured is an evaluation of items that had a higher value a few years but have since gone down in price. Remember its not the price you paid for something that you are insuring but rather the cost of replacing it like for like and with advances in technology making appliances and devices cheaper, their cost to replace is also reducing.

Tips on preventing being overinsured

Don’t guess or purposely evaluate an item to be worth more than it is especially to the extent where you think you would make a profit by doing this, insurance companies and in particular loss adjusters are very good at determining an accurate value of items and it is in your interest to do the same.
Don’t do an evaluation of how much buildings and contents cost in the first year of insurance and then never do it again. It may be unrealistic to expect people to evaluate everything every year but remember that what you own collectively and insure in year 1 isn’t going to be the same as in year 10. For high value listed items on an insurance policy, you should keep the insurance company notified when you sell them, if they are damaged (but you don’t claim) or if their value has dropped significantly.
Check that your possessions aren’t insured over several different policies. Banks these days often offer a premium service for monthly fee which may include phone and gadget insurance as well. Ideally it is not worth claiming for a phone or small electrical items as a singular claim on your home insurance because losing a no claims bonus and an increase in premium can out way the benefits of the claim in the long term. That said it is worth noting when items are insured and with whom because you may be paying for a separate phone insurance policy when you already have insurance with your bank.
If you live in a flat and contribute towards a management company then make sure you don’t have duplicate cover with a single flat policy you have taken out and a block of flats policy taken out by the management company.
Overinsurance means that you´ve insured your property for such value which is higher than it in fact is. For example car bought for 500.000 CZK was insured at 900.000 CZK.

 Considering car theft while having allrisk insurance, insurance companies always pay out to you a current vehicle´s price (the only exception is when you have a GAP insurance). 

Imagine you bought a car for 500.000 CZK 6 years ago. You insured it for that value and you pay for example 30.000 CZK yearly premium. You haven´t done any corrections in your contract during the whole time. In nowdays, current value of the car is 100.000 CZK. You still pay 30.000 CZK per year. Sudenly, your car is stolen. Insurance company pays you off 100.000 CZK.

Can you see it? You pay premium for 500.000 CZK car, but you get only 100.000 CZK. That´s the overinsurance meaning.

To avoid overinsurance, keep your contracts up to date. Contact your insurance broker every year to recalculate you a price of your car. Nevertheless sometime can be conversion (update) of your contract contraproductive. Since bright new cars have much cheaper rates. In short - some cars are better to be overinsured for e.g. 3 years. Since due to higher rates for elder cars, you can be insured for lower price but pay higher premium. (If you insure new car, you gain rates for new car. This low rate you have until a contract update. )
Property insurance provides protection against most risks to property, such as fire, theft and some weather damage. This includes specialized forms of insurance such as fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake insurance, home insurance, or boiler insurance. Property is insured in two main ways—open perils and named perils.

Open perils cover all the causes of loss not specifically excluded in the policy. Common exclusions on open peril policies include damage resulting from earthquakes, floods, nuclear incidents, acts of terrorism, and war. Named perils require the actual cause of loss to be listed in the policy for insurance to be provided. The more common named perils include such damage-causing events as fire, lightning, explosion, and theft.

Contents  [hide] 
1 History
2 Types of Coverage
3 US Property Insurance Claims
3.1 World Trade Center case
3.2 Post-Hurricane Katrina property insurance claims
3.3 Florida Consumer Choice Act
4 Fire insurance in India
4.1 Perils covered
4.2 Exclusions
5 See also
6 References
7 External links
History[edit]
See also: History of insurance

An 18th-century fire insurance contract.
Property insurance can be traced to the Great Fire of London, which in 1666 devoured more than 13,000 houses. The devastating effects of the fire converted the development of insurance "from a matter of convenience into one of urgency, a change of opinion reflected in Sir Christopher Wren's inclusion of a site for 'the Insurance Office' in his new plan for London in 1667".[1] A number of attempted fire insurance schemes came to nothing, but in 1681, economist Nicholas Barbon and eleven associates established the first fire insurance company, the "Insurance Office for Houses", at the back of the Royal Exchange to insure brick and frame homes. Initially, 5,000 homes were insured by Barbon's Insurance Office.[2]

In the wake of this first successful venture, many similar companies were founded in the following decades. Initially, each company employed its own fire department to prevent and minimise the damage from conflagrations on properties insured by them. They also began to issue 'Fire insurance marks' to their customers; these would be displayed prominently above the main door to the property in order to aid positive identification. One such notable company was the Hand in Hand Fire & Life Insurance Society, founded in 1696 at Tom's Coffee House in St. Martin's Lane in London.[3]

The first property insurance company still extant was founded in 1710 as the 'Sun Fire Office' now, through many mergers and acquisitions, the RSA Insurance Group.[3]

In Colonial America, Benjamin Franklin helped to popularize and make standard the practice of insurance, particularly Property insurance to spread the risk of loss from fire, in the form of perpetual insurance. In 1752, he founded the Philadelphia Contributionship for the Insurance of Houses from Loss by Fire. Franklin's company refused to insure certain buildings, such as wooden houses, where the risk of fire was too great.

Types of Coverage[edit]
There are the three types of insurance coverage. Replacement cost coverage pays the cost of replacing your property regardless of depreciation or appreciation. Premiums for this type of coverage are based on replacement cost values, and not based on actual cash value.[4] Actual cash value coverage provides for replacement cost minus depreciation. Extended replacement cost will pay over the coverage limit if the costs for construction have increased. This generally will not exceed 25% of the limit. When you obtain an insurance policy, the coverage limit established is the maximum amount the insurance company will pay out in case of loss of property.[citation needed]

This amount will need to fluctuate if homes in your neighborhood are rising; the amount needs to be in step with the actual value of your home. In case of a fire, household content replacement is tabulated as a percentage of the value of the home. In case of high-value items, the insurance company may ask to specifically cover these items separate from the other household contents. One last coverage option is to have alternative living arrangements included in a policy.[citation needed] If a fire leaves your home uninhabitable, the policy can help pay for a hotel or other living arrangements.

US Property Insurance Claims[edit]
World Trade Center case[edit]

Attack on the World Trade Center
Following the September 11 attacks, a jury deliberated insurance payouts for the destruction of the World Trade Center. Leaseholder Larry A. Silverstein sought more than $7 billion in insurance money; he argued two attacks had occurred at the WTC. Its insurers—including Chubb Corp. and Swiss Reinsurance Co.—claimed the "coordinated" attack counted as a single event. In December 2004 the federal jury decided in Silverstein's favor.[5]

In May 2007 New York Governor Eliot Spitzer announced more than $4.5 billion would be made available to rebuild the 16-acre (65,000 m2) WTC complex as part of a major insurance claims settlement.[6]

Post-Hurricane Katrina property insurance claims[edit]

New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina
In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, several thousand homeowners filed lawsuits against their insurance companies accusing them of bad faith and failing to properly and promptly adjust their claims.[7] Insurance companies changed their pricing policies after Katrina, with most policy holders in New Orleans seeing their property insurance premiums double after the storm,[8] and deductibles increase by two, or even three, fold.[9] The losses from Katrina severely impacted both the affordability and coverage amounts provided by property insurance, even in regions that were not impacted by the hurricane.[10]

Florida Consumer Choice Act[edit]
On June 24, 2009, Florida Governor Charlie Crist vetoed the Consumer Choice Act (H.B. 1171). The bill would have trumped state regulation, and allowed Florida's biggest insurance companies to establish their own rates.[11] State Farm Florida expressed its disappointment with Crist's veto of the bill the company said "would have given consumers more options in their choice of a property insurer. It would have attracted more capital to the property insurance market in Florida".[12] State Farm had proposed a 47.1% property insurance rate increase for Florida policyholders. As a result of Crist's move, State Farm plans to drop coverage for more than 700,000 homeowners by 2011.[13]

Remarking upon State Farm's pullout from Florida, Ted Corless, a property insurance attorney who has represented large insurance carriers like Nationwide, noted "that homeowners are really going to have to look out for themselves".[14] Five days after Crist vetoed the Consumer Choice Act, Corless defended property insurance deregulation by pointing out that "if the blue-chip insurance companies wanted to price themselves out of the market", then they would go out of business. He accused Crist of making choices on behalf of consumers, not protecting their right to choose. In 2006 the average Florida annual insurance premium was $1,386 for a homeowner, one of the highest in the country.[15]

Fire insurance in India[edit]
Fire insurance business in India is governed by the All India Fire Tariff that lays down the terms of coverage, the premium rates and the conditions of the fire policy.[16] The fire insurance policy has been renamed as "Standard Fire and Special Perils Policy". The risks covered are as follows:

Dwellings, offices, shops, hospitals:
Industrial, manufacturing risks
Utilities located outside industrial/manufacturing risks
Machinery and accessories
Storage risks outside the compound of industrial risks
Tank farms/gas holders located outside the compound of industrial risks
Perils covered[edit]
The following causes of loss are covered:

Fire
Lightning
Explosion, implosion
Aircraft damage
Riot, strike
Terrorism
Storm, cyclone, typhoon, tempest, hurricane, tornado, flood & inundation.
Impact damage
Malicious damage
Subsidence, landslide
Bursting or overflowing of tanks
Missile testing operations
Bush fire[17]
Exclusions[edit]
The following are excluded from insurance coverage:

Loss or damage caused by war, civil war, and kindred perils
Loss or damage caused by nuclear activity
Loss or damage to the stocks in cold storage caused by change in temperature
Loss or damage due to over-running of electric and/or electronic machines
Claims In the event of a fire loss covered under the fire insurance policy, the insured shall immediately give notice thereof to the insurance company. Within 15 days of the occurrence of such loss the insured should submit a claim in writing giving the details of damages and their estimated values. Details of other insurances on the same property should also be declared.The property of an Industrial customer can be insured with If's Fire Insurance or Extensive Fire Insurance, Machinery Break Down Insurance or All Risks Insurance.
Property Insurance for Your Business
If a major storm or fire destroys your shop and inventory scheduled for delivery, you want to be confident that your business can recover with as little disruption as possible. With property insurance from Liberty Mutual Insurance, you can protect your business space as well as its contents. You can even elect to cover lost income or additional expenses incurred while your business is closed.
Broad Coverage Options
With Liberty Mutual, you’ll find the right solution for your business. Our business owner's policy (BOP) and package solutions bundle key property and general liability coverages and can be tailored to meet the needs of small and midsize businesses in a variety of industries.
If you own a larger business, we offer primary property coverage as well as excess coverage for more complex risks. You can also take advantage of other coverages:
RM Select™, our proprietary property policy, offers industry-specific solutions for food processing, commercial real estate, and hotels.
Green Select™ covers costs for materials to recertify or upgrade to “green” certification if you have a “green” building or want to make your facilities more eco-friendly.
Inland marine protects your materials that frequently move to different locations.
Equipment breakdown covers your business in the event of equipment failure losses.
Multinational, offered in more than 150 countries, protects your locations if you have offices in the United States and abroad.
Tailored Support
Our in-house property risk engineering services, training, and resources can help you keep your business safe and well protected. And in the event of a damaging incident, our claims staff will quickly assess your situation and develop a plan to help get your business up and running.
Property Insurance Types, Perils, and Exclusions
There are different types of property insurance such as home, earthquake, floor, and fire insurance. They offer protection against risks such as adverse weather conditions, natural hazards, theft, and other perils. The type of property to be insured, the coverage, and perils, and exclusions vary.

Coverage

Many issuers offer insurance policies for forest stands and forests, livestock, movable property, equipment, residential units, and apartments and houses. When it comes to movable property, examples are household utensils and appliances, clothing, pieces of furniture, computer, video, and audio equipment, and so on. Companies also offer coverage for equipment such as open air constructions, pools, outdoor fireplaces, gates, fences, etc. Finally, pets and livestock such as pigs, goats, and sheep are also covered. Basically, insurance policies fall in two main categories – single peril and broad form. The former offers protection against specific perils such as fire, tornadoes, terrorism, etc. The latter identifies a number of perils and disasters. They are all included in the policy.

Fire insurance offers protection against incidents such as implosion, explosion, lighting, fire, bush fire, storm, and others. Debt securities, deeds, currencies, and accounting records are excluded. Other exclusions are loss due to theft, revolution, insurrection, invasion, and war. Under the typical property coverage, events such as nuclear hazards, governmental actions, earth movements, and ordinances are excluded.


Some policies exclude hazards such as sewage, surface water, volcanic eruptions, mud flows, and mud slides. Other examples are mine subsidence, floods, landslides, and damage due to expansive soils. For example, you may have to buy subsidence coverage, if you live in an area above underground mining.

Coverage Types

Coverage types include personal property, other structures, and house damage. Examples of other structures are fencing, work sheds, detached garages, and other buildings. Some types of insurance offer additional protection against floods and earthquakes. The premium depends on the location of the property. It is typically higher for properties located in flood-prone areas.

A standard policy usually includes liability insurance and loss of use, personal property, and dwelling coverage. The personal property coverage includes items such as electronics and equipment, clothing, furniture, and sporting goods. Holders are reimbursed for items that are destroyed or damaged. The dwelling coverage includes your air conditioning, heating, plumbing, electrical wiring, and others. The loss of use coverage reimburses additional living and housing expenses that are incurred. In general, it offers protection in case the property cannot be lived in within a certain period. You can use it for your car as well. For example, you will need an alternative vehicle if you lose your car due to theft or collision. Your insurer must cover the costs incurred for the rental if this is your only vehicle. By the same token, the insurance company must cover the costs for alternative living arrangements, including living, restaurant, and hotel expenses. With most policies, insurers offer up to 20 percent of the dwelling coverage. Your loss of use coverage would amount to $50,000 if your dwelling coverage is $200,000. Standard policies offer 10 percent of the dwelling coverage for other structures such as fences and sheds. The amount paid would be $12,000 if the dwelling coverage is $120,000. Some policies also include medical payments and personal liability protection.

Modifications

Policies can be modified in different ways, for example, through schedules, exclusions, and endorsements. Schedules list the types of property, regions, and covered locations. The schedule can be updated.
Different Types of Commercial Insurance
The most common types of commercial insurance are property, liability and workers' compensation. In general, property insurance covers damages to your business property; liability insurance covers damages to third parties; and workers' compensation insurance covers on-the-job injuries to your employees. Depending on your business, you may want additional specialized coverages. Listed below are some of the different types of business insurance.

Property Insurance

Property insurance pays for losses and damages to real or personal property. For example, a property insurance policy would cover fire damage to your office space. You can purchase additional coverages for business property, including:

Boiler and Machinery Insurance

Boiler and machinery insurance, sometimes referred to as "equipment breakdown" or "mechanical breakdown coverage," provides coverage for the accidental breakdown of boilers, machinery, and equipment. This type of coverage usually will reimburse you for property damage and business interruption losses. For example, this coverage would cover fire damage to computers.

Debris Removal Insurance

Debris removal insurance covers the cost of removing debris after a fire, flood, windstorm, etc. For example, a fire burns your building to the ground. Before you can start rebuilding, the remains of the old building have to be removed. Your property insurance will cover the costs of rebuilding, but not of removing the debris.

Builder's Risk Insurance

Builder's risk insurance covers buildings while they are being constructed. For example, a Builder's risk policy would cover losses if a windstorm takes down your partially constructed condominium complex.

Glass Insurance

Glass insurance covers broken store windows and plate glass windows.

Inland Marine Insurance

Inland marine insurance covers property in transit and other people's property on your premises. For example, this insurance would cover fire-damage to customers' clothing from a fire at your dry cleaning business.

Business Interruption Insurance

Business interruption insurance covers lost income and expenses resulting from property damage or loss. For example, if a fire forces you to close your doors for two months, this insurance would reimburse you for salaries, taxes, rents, and net profits that would have been earned during the two-month period.

Ordinance or Law Insurance

Ordinance or law insurance covers the costs associated with having to demolish and rebuild to code when your building has been partially destroyed (usually 50 percent). For example, your three-story building is 100 years old. A flood destroys the basement and first two stories. Because more than 50 percent of your building has to be rebuilt, a local ordinance requires that the building be completely demolished and rebuilt according to current building codes. Property insurance covers only the replacement value, not the upgrade.Tenant's Insurance

Commercial leases often require tenants to carry a certain amount of insurance. A renter's commercial policy covers damages to improvements you make to your rental space and damages to the building caused by the negligence of your employees.

Crime Insurance

Crime insurance covers theft, burglary, and robbery of money, securities, stock, and fixtures from employees and outsiders.

Fidelity Bonds

A bond company covers losses due to a bonded employee's theft of business property and money.

Liability Insurance

Liability insurance covers injuries that you cause to third parties. If someone sues you for personal injuries or property damage, the cost of defending and resolving the suit would be covered by your liability insurance policy. A general liability policy will cover you for common risks, including customer injuries on your premises. More specialized varieties of liability insurance include:

Errors and Omissions Insurance

Errors and omissions ("E & O") insurance covers inadvertent mistakes or failures that cause injury to a third party. The act must actually be an inadvertent error, and not merely poor judgment or intentional acts. For example, an E & O policy would cover damages arising from an insurance agent failing to file policy applications, or a notary forgetting to fill out notarizations properly.

Malpractice Insurance

Malpractice insurance, or professional liability insurance, pays for losses resulting from injuries to third parties when a professional's conduct falls below the profession's standard of care. For example, if a doctor makes a mistake that other doctors of his specialty would not have made, his patient might sue him. A malpractice policy will pay his defense costs and any judgment or settlement. Malpractice insurance is available for doctors, dentists, accountants, real estate agents, architects, and other professionals.

Automobile Insurance

Commercial automobile policies cover the cars, vans, trucks and trailers used in your business. The coverage will reimburse you if your vehicles are damaged or stolen or if the driver injures a person or property.

Directors' and Officers' Liability Insurance

This type of insurance is generally purchased by corporations and nonprofit organizations to cover the costs of lawsuits against directors and officers.

Workers' Compensation Insurance

Workers' compensation insurance covers you for an employee's on-the-job injuries. Businesses with employees are required by various state laws to carry some type of workers' compensation insurance. In most cases, workers' compensation laws prohibit the employee from bringing a negligence lawsuit against an employer for work-related injuries.
ypes of Insurance

What is property & casualty insurance?
Property and casualty (P&C) or general insurance involves all types of insurance other than life and health insurance. It includes:

Automobile insurance
Automobile insurance premiums represent more than fifty percent (50%) of all property and casualty premiums in Canada.

All vehicles by law have to be insured for third party liability at a minimum.  Most drivers also insure themselves against damage to their vehicle or loss to theft or fire.  In B.C., Saskatchewan and Manitoba automobile insurance is government owned and administered through broker agencies.  Private automotive insurance companies operate in the balance of Canada. 

Property insurance
Personal and business properties represent the second largest source of premiums to insurers.

Home owners with mortgages are legally required to insure their property against loss or injury to others.  Most owners also protect their belongings, both in and out of the house, with additional contents insurance.

Personal property insurance refers to insurance policies provided for property having a personal or non-business use. Types of personal property policies includes:

Tenant’s insurance;
Homeowner’s insurance;
Mobile home insurance;
Condominium unit owner insurance;
Secondary dwelling insurance;
Seasonal dwelling insurance.
Business Insurance
Commercial property insurance refers to insurance policies provided for property having a business use.  In addition to providing coverage for loss, damage and liability issues, on both the premises and contents, business owners buy protection for the indirect loss of business costs associated with having to suspend operations while recovering from an incident.

Liability insurance
Liability insurance provides protection when the policy holder is financially responsible for injury or damage they cause to others.  Premiums from liability insurance represent the third major source of income to insurers.
Purpose of Insurance

What is insurance and why is it important?

The major function of P&C insurance... is simply to restore your property and possessions or business to the point it was before the insurable incident occurred, to re-establish normalcy in your life.  The economic structure of the insurance industry is built around a system in which the cost of the losses of the few is shared among the many. Insurance can be viewed as a large pot into which all premiums are placed. The pot has to provide for payment of the losses of those who have claims, the cost of running the business, plus a reasonable profit for the provider.

Insurance is all about managing risk and providing financial compensation in the event of a loss.  Generally, the risks people face fall into the following categories:

Personal risk
People are their own greatest asset. Financial loss will almost always accompany the loss of one’s health or life.

Property risk
People will incur a financial loss when owned property is destroyed or damaged.

Liability risk
When people’s action result in injury or damage to others, the law generally provides that they be held financially responsible.

In Canada, an insurance policy can be purchased directly from a company, from an insurance agent of a company, or from an insurance broker who advises you on your appropriate coverage and shops on your behalf among a choice of recommended providers.
Property insurance insures your business against loss or damage to the location of the business and to its contents. It will also insure against loss or damage to contents under your control. Finally, if your business rents or leases a location or travels to other physical locations, then your business will be required by the property owner to carry property insurance by the terms of the lease or contract.

Ads
Supply Chain Risk
www.razient.com
Supplier Risk Assessment Vendor Risk and Compliance Tracking
NIVEA alakformáló
nivea.hu/alakformáló_krém
Segít visszaszerezni vonzó alakját. Ápolás, harmóniában a borrel.
Broker Online: Hungary
www.plus500.hu/Borker_Online
Advanced Analysis Tools.Live Quotes Trade With our Software.CFD Service
Business Insurance Policy
Personal Insurance
Property Owners Insurance
Insurance Agent
Contractor Insurance
The more kinds of loss the policy covers, the higher the premium. Property insurance comes in two forms:

Broad Form – This type of policy identifies a number of different types of disasters and covers against loss from all identified causes in the policy.

Single or Specific Peril – This type of policy insures against loss only from the identified peril. This is typically a separate fire policy. However, other single perils can be insured against, for example, terrorism.

For most small businesses, a broad form property insurance policy is included in a packaged policy known as the “business owners’ policy” and will be the best coverage for the premium dollar. Some businesses, however, either because of specific risks or unusually high risk, may not be eligible for such a package. In that case, several specific peril policies may need to priced and examined.

Property insurance policies can be modified:

Endorsements – Endorsements add increased coverage or identify other business locations that are covered. This can include a customer’s location, for example, if your business is working at their location. Endorsements are a big benefit for your business and can be added, typically by a phone call, to a policy relatively easily if you have a good insurance professional.

Exclusions – Exclusions take away coverage. Your insurance professional or insurer will tell you that property policies are “always” written with the “such-and-such” exclusion. Exclusions are the business insurance purchaser’s worst enemy. The most recent example is after the hurricanes in 2004-2005. Many insurers claimed that the exclusion in their policies for “wind” damage excluded much of the damage from coverage. Regardless of what an insurer tells you: exclusions take away coverage.

Schedules – Schedules are lists of covered locations and property. These must be updated regularly and at any time a location or major covered equipment changes or is purchased. Good insurance professionals will contact you on a regular basis to discuss updating scheduled locations and equipment. If a location or piece of equipment is not a “scheduled” location or content, there is a possibility that a claim could be denied on that basis.


Property insurance can pay damages or loss based on one of two ways:

Actual Cash Value (or, ACV) – Actual cash value means that your loss or damage is valued at the value of the property loss. Sounds fair. But, if a $100,000 car lift in your garage has been depreciated over a five-year period it may be found to have an ACV of $20,000 at the time of loss. You can’t purchase a new lift for $20,000.

Replacement Value – Replacement value means that you are reimbursed the actual amount necessary to replace the equipment when it is lost. In the example above, if the new lift costs $120,000 to replace, then you get a new lift for $120,000.

Replacement value coverage typically carries higher premiums.

All of the above elements must be considered when reviewing and comparing property insurance for your business. A comparison made only on the premiums ignores critical aspects of the policy.
Property Insurance
ROLE OF PROPERTY INSURANCE

Insurers are in the unique position of having encyclopedic information about the many different ways your business property could be damaged or destroyed, from fire and flooding to embezzlement. Property is also vulnerable as a result of a variety of other events such as electrical surges, accidental activation of a chemical sprinkler system or a computer virus.

Because insurers know so much about what can go wrong, they can provide your business with the insurance coverages your particular type of enterprise requires. Without appropriate insurance, property losses can easily cause the entire enterprise to fail.

The purpose of property insurance for the small business is to provide critical financial assistance in the event of a loss, so that the enterprise can continue to operate with as little disruption as possible. 

Property insurance alone is seldom enough, however. It should be but one part of an overall risk management and disaster recovery plan. On average, businesses that devote resources to risk reduction and risk control have fewer insurance claims. Firms with a good record on claims generally have more insurers competing for their business, so that they are able to find coverage more easily and often at a lower price than companies that have more losses.

We cover here, in a general way, many of the more common types of property coverage. You can obtain full information about your particular policy by reading the policy itself and discussing your coverage needs with your agent or insurance company.

PROPERTY INSURANCE POLICIES

Insurers offer small businessowners a huge variety of property insurance policies. There are  policies that cover only a single peril, or cause of loss, such as a fire insurance policy, a crime policy or an electronic equipment policy. The particulars of the policies vary from insurer to insurer.

And there are policies that include several different coverages in a single “package.” The majority of small businessowners find it more convenient and economical to purchase a package policy, which provides protection against many types of loss in a single policy. Insurers may create their own insurance policies. Many rely in part on a package policy format from ISO. This policy is generally referred to in the insurance industry as the Businessowners Policy (BOP). The BOP is revised periodically. The discussion here is based on provisions of the 2004 revision to the BOP.

PROPERTY COVERAGE IN THE BOP

The BOP covers any buildings the business owns and much of the property needed to run the business.

Specifically, the policy covers:

Buildings as named in the policy "Declarations," generally the first pages of the policy. Structures are covered as well as permanently installed fixtures, machinery and equipment; outdoor fixtures; items you use to maintain or service the building, such as appliances; and additions under construction. You can choose to insure your buildings at their "actualy cash value"—what they are worth—or their "replacement cost"—what it would cost to replace them with new construction. To keep up with the increasing cost of rebuilding, the policy’s limit of insurance for covered buildings will automatically rise by a set percentage each year. Be sure to discuss with your agent whether you should purchase the standard building coverage or replacement cost coverage.
Building contents, although there are a few exceptions. The policy covers most property on or near the business premises that is used in the business. This would include such things as machinery, computers, raw materials or inventory. You also have coverage for any leased property, which you are contractually obligated to insure.
Property of others that is in your care, custody and control to the extent you are legally liable for that property. This coverage is particularly important to a business, such as a computer repair shop, that earns revenue from servicing the property of others.
WHAT ABOUT A BUSINESS THAT LEASES OR RENTS ITS PREMISES?

If your business rents or leases its premises, your lease should describe your obligations with respect to insurance. If you are the sole tenant, you may be responsible for insuring the building. You may be responsible for continuing to pay rent even if the building is destroyed. Should a fire destroy the building, will the landlord or the tenant be responsible for debris removal? You may want to review your lease with your insurance agent to be sure your property insurance covers your obligations.

For those who rent, the BOP provides coverage for tenants' improvements and betterments. These are fixtures, alterations, installations or additions that you have put into the space

COVERED CAUSES OF LOSS

Insurance contracts always describe in some way the perils being insured against. One type of BOP names the covered causes of loss. Another uses what insurers may call the “special form,” which states that all causes of loss are covered except those that are excluded by name. Because the special form provides broader coverage, premiums for this type of BOP may be higher.

In the BOP format that names covered causes of loss, those included are fire, lightning, most explosions, windstorm or hail, smoke from accidental fire, aircraft or vehicles (not including those owned or operated by the business itself), riot or civil commotion, vandalism, automatic sprinkler leakage, sinkhole collapse, building collapse, volcanic action and certain types of damage from water or other liquids.

CAUSES OF LOSS THAT AREN’T COVERED

A number of events that can cause property loss are not covered by the basic BOP. Some, such as employee dishonesty or breakdown of a steam boiler, are excluded from the basic BOP, but you can add coverage to it by payment of an additional premium. Some events, such as wear and tear, aren’t covered because they don’t meet the basic criteria for insurance of being accidental and unpredictable. (Regular maintenance of property is your responsibility.) Coverage for other events, such as flood and earthquake, aren’t needed by all businesses. Separate policies are available. Nuclear reaction and war are considered to be uninsurable, since insurers cannot predict with any degree of accuracy the frequency of such events or amount of damage likely to occur. 

The following are some of the other events that can cause damage that are usually excluded from the basic BOP: power failure (except when it causes loss or damage to computers and electronic data); failure of computer hardware or software; robbery and burglary; most instances of pollution; and changes in humidity or temperature. Also excluded is coverage for missing property where there is no physical evidence to show what happened to the property, such as with a shortage discovered after taking inventory.

Be sure you understand what causes of loss are and aren’t covered by your policy. Discuss with your agent the extent to which your business risks a loss from any of these excluded events and whether you should purchase coverage for these particular risks if it is available.

PROPERTY THAT ISN’T COVERED

The basic BOP excludes some types of property from its coverage. For many of these items, such as money and securities or outdoor signs, insurance is available as an addition to the BOP for an additional premium. For items such as motor vehicles or boats, however, you will need to purchase a separate policy. Excluded property usually includes:

Any vehicles subject to motor vehicle registration, including aircraft, autos and trucks
Bullion, money or securities
Land, water, growing crops, lawns, trees, shrubs or plants
Outdoor fences and signs not attached to the building
You should discuss with your agent what property is and isn’t covered by your policy, as well as whether you may need to purchase additional coverage for some types of property excluded from the basic BOP coverage. Since most businesses, for example, own or use vehicles, they should consider business automobile insurance.

IS THERE ANY COVERAGE FOR POLLUTION?

Coverage for pollution is limited to cleaning up pollution that was caused by a covered cause of loss occurring during the policy period. For example, if vandals opened drums of a toxic chemical and poured it on the ground, the insurer would cover the cost of the cleanup, up to the policy limit, since vandalism is a covered cause of loss. On the other hand, if the toxic chemical slowly leaked into the ground because the drum was defective and had a tiny hole in it, you would not have coverage under the BOP. A defect in the drum is not a covered cause of loss under your property policy. (For help with cleanup costs in this hypothetical situation, you might find compensation from the liability insurance of the drum manufacturer or seller of the chemical.)

BUSINESS INCOME AND EXTRA EXPENSE COVERAGE

If your main business premises are destroyed along with much of the property you used to operate, this loss, though devastating, may be only just one part of the total. You should consider purchasing Business Income and Extra Expense Insurance (also known as Business Interruption Insurance).

Every day you are unable to operate is a day of lost income, for you personally and for the business. If the property damage or loss prevents you from providing products or services to your customers or clients, they may go elsewhere and many of them may never return. If you are to keep your employees, you must continue to pay their wages, even when the business is generating much less than normal income. It is little wonder that many businesses that lack insurance to cover the potential ongoing economic effects of a serious destructive event are unable to survive. A survey by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners found that only 35 percent of small businesses, defined as firms with fewer than 100 employees, have business interruption insurance.

Prudent businesses have disaster recovery plans that include insurance to cover lost income and extra expenses that can result from getting back on track after a covered loss.

Because coverage for lost income and extra expenses is so important to continued business survival, it is part of the standard BOP. The policy covers actual loss of net business income that would have been earned had it not been necessary to suspend operations due to a covered cause of loss. The policy also covers continuing normal operating expenses such as utility payments and payroll.

The insurer will pay, as well, extra expenses that you incur to avoid or minimize the suspension of operations. Such extra expenses often include costs to relocate, and to equip and to operate replacement premises, as well as expenses to repair or to replace property and to restore lost information on damaged valuable papers and records.

Generally, these coverages are triggered only when you have a direct loss from a covered cause of loss. If the cause of loss is an earthquake, there will be no coverage under the BOP. If your business must be closed due to someone else’s loss, there is no coverage. For example, your business could be an accounting firm located on the third floor of a large building. If there is a fire on the ground floor of the building, which does no damage in your office but causes the building to be shut down for repairs for a month, your BOP would not provide coverage for lost business income and extra expenses, since you did not have a direct loss yourself.

SEASONAL VARIATIONS IN VALUE

Your business may be one of the many that experience seasonal variations in the value of inventory, raw materials and other items. A complete loss at the height of the summer if you sell ice cream or during the winter holiday season if you have a retail operation may be several times larger than during the rest of the year. To protect against a loss in the busy season, the BOP provides for an automatic 25 percent increase in your policy limit for business personal property. The seasonal escalator applies only if you have insured your business personal property to at least 100 percent of your average monthly values during either the 12 months preceding the loss or the period of time you have been in business as of the date of the loss, whichever is less.

OTHER LOSSES AND EXPENSES COVERED BY THE BOP

The BOP includes numerous other coverages to protect your business from a variety of accidental events that could wreck havoc on your financial well being. These include:

Actions of Civil Authorities
Bogus Money Orders and Counterfeit Money
Contingent Business Interruption
Computer Operations Interruption
Debris Removal
Electronic Data Loss
Expense to Preserve the Value of Property
Fire Extinguisher Recharge
Forgery or Alteration
Fungi, Rot and Bacteria
Window Glass Breakage Expenses
Actions of Civil Authorities – Sometimes physical damage to property other than your own leads the police or other civil authorities to prevent you from having access to your own premises. If the loss at the other property is due to a cause covered by your policy, then the insurer will pay for your actual loss of business income and any necessary extra expense caused by the action of civil authorities. By way of example, assume you own a hair salon. An explosion has significantly damaged other businesses near you, although your own premises suffered no physical damage. The police close off the whole block for a week, preventing your business from operating from that location. Your insurer will cover your lost income and extra expense caused by this action.

Bogus Money Orders and Counterfeit Money – Should your business make the good faith mistake of accepting bogus money orders or counterfeit money, the insurer will pay up to $1,000 to cover the loss.

Contingent Business Interruption – This coverage, which may also be called “Business Income from Dependent Properties” or "Contingent Business Income," applies when your business is dependent on another operation and the other operation is unable to conduct its usual business because it has been damaged by a cause of loss that is covered by your policy. Should you suffer a loss due to such damage at the premises of a business you depend on (“dependent property”), the insurer will pay for the actual loss of business income you sustain. For example, you’ve designed a new type of folding beach chair and you have many orders to ship it in time for the summer selling season. Your chairs are manufactured at the Contract Furniture Factory (CFF). Due to damage from a fire, CFF is unable to make your chairs. Should neither you nor CFF have a backup manufacturer who can fulfill the contract, you will lose income from the orders you cannot ship. Your insurer will pay for the net income loss you suffer as a result. If, however, damage at CFF is due to an earthquake and you don’t have earthquake insurance this coverage will not apply since the damage at the dependent property was not due to a covered cause of loss.

Computer Operations Interruption – Should computer operations be interrupted due to a covered cause of loss, your insurer will pay up to $10,000 for business income lost and extra expenses incurred as a result of the computer problem. In addition to other causes of loss, this coverage applies to a loss caused by a computer virus, harmful code or other harmful instructions entered into your computer system or a network to which it is connected. There is no coverage, however, for loss or damage caused by the actions of any employee, including temporary or leased employees, or by anyone you hire to work on your computer system.

Debris Removal – When a building is destroyed or damaged by fire, wind or other peril, debris is left that must be removed before reconstruction can occur. The business policy, within certain conditions, covers the cost of removing debris left behind as a result of a covered cause of loss. There is an extra $10,000 of coverage for debris removal should the limit of insurance be reached before debris removal has been factored in.

Electronic Data Loss – In the event electronic data is destroyed or damaged as the result of a covered cause of loss, the insurer will pay the cost to replace or restore it. Causes of loss that apply to this coverage include a computer virus, harmful code or other harmful instructions entered into your computer system or a network to which it is connected. The coverage applies as well to cyber extortionists who threaten to bring your computer system down with a code or virus if you don’t meet their demands. There is no coverage, however, for loss or damage caused by the actions of any employee, including temporary or leased employees or by anyone you hire to work on your computer system. (Negligent work by third parties should be covered by their liability insurance.)

Expense to Preserve the Value of Property – To preserve the value of property, it may be necessary to move it from the insured premises to another location. For example, if a major storm is predicted and your building has no basement, you may want to move some of your high-value inventory to a safer location. The property policy covers such property while it is being transported and for up to 10 days after it is moved to the alternative location.

Fire Extinguisher Systems Recharge Expense – If your fire extinguishing system is discharged (other than during installation or testing), the insurer will pay to have it recharged or replaced, whichever costs less.

Forgery or Alteration – The insurer will pay up to $2,500 (unless you buy a higher limit) for losses resulting directly from forgery or alteration of any check, draft, promissory note or similar promise of payment in money that you or your agent issued or that someone impersonating you or your agent issued.

Fungi, Rot and Bacteria – Your BOP insurer typically limits the situations in which it will pay for loss or damage caused by fungi, wet or dry rot, or bacteria. Usually, the insurer will pay up to $15,000 only when the underlying cause of the damage is a specified cause of loss other than fire or lightning that occurs during the policy period and only if you used all reasonable means to save and preserve the property from further damage at the time of and after that occurrence.

Window Glass Breakage Expense – Where glass has been broken, the insurer will pay expenses to put up temporary boards if repair or replacement of damaged glass is delayed.

ADDITIONAL COVERAGES YOU MAY NEED

The standard Businessowners Policy (BOP) recognizes that some types of coverage are important for some customers but not for others. It makes provision for adding coverage through what insurers may refer to as "optional coverages," coverage extensions and endorsements. These are among the coverages you may choose to add to your BOP with the payment of an additional premium:

Accounts Receivable
Adding Additional Insureds
Burglary and Robbery
Computer Fraud and Funds Transfer Fraud
Earthquake and Volcano Coverage
Employee Dishonesty
Food Contamination
Mechanical Breakdown
Money and Securities
More Coverage for Valuable Papers, Records and Electronic Media
Newly Acquired or Constructed Property
Outdoor Property
Outdoor Signs
Personal Effects
Personal Property Off Premises
Spoilage Coverage
Utility Services—Direct Damage
Valuable Papers and Records
Water Back-up and Sump Overflow
 Accounts Receivable – As part of your risk management plan, to the extent feasible, you should keep backup copies of your accounts receivable in a separate location. For some businesses, however, it may be in the nature of the business that accounts receivable records are vulnerable to property loss. If needed, you may extend coverage under your BOP. The accounts receivable extension obligates the insurer to pay amounts due from your customers that you are unable to collect. The limit is up to $10,000 per occurrence for records located on the premises described in the policy "Declarations" or $5,000 for records located elsewhere.

Adding Additional Insureds – In many situations, a business is required by contract or law to add coverage to its BOP for other parties who usually have property at risk that is in the care of the insured. Such parties typically include managers or lessors of a rented or leased premises and mortgage holders. You can add coverage to your BOP with an Endorsement Adding Additional Insureds.

Computer Fraud and Funds Transfer Fraud – Your business may run the risk that someone will cause an unauthorized transfer of funds from your bank account, whether through electronic or written instructions. The Endorsement for Computer Fraud and Funds Transfer Fraud covers this risk. The insurer pays for the loss of money and securities resulting directly from a fraudulent instruction instructing a financial institution to transfer, pay, or deliver money or securities from your “transfer account.” The endorsement defines a “transfer account” as “an account maintained by you at a financial institution from which you can initiate the transfer, payment or delivery of money and securities.”

Burglary and Robbery – If your business has high-value goods that are attractive to criminals, loss control will go a long way to reducing the threat of theft or burglary. Optional burglary and robbery coverage, however, may be a wise part of the risk management plan.

Burglary means taking of property from inside the described premises by a person unlawfully accessing the premises as evidenced by marks of forcible entry or exit. Robbery means unlawfully taking property from a person who has the property in his or her care and custody.

The insurer covers the property on the business premises, while it is at a bank or savings institution, when it is in the custody of any employee or businessowner in his or her living quarters or while it is in transit between any of these places.

Coverage is limited to $2,500 for furs, watches, jewelry, precious metals, patterns, dies, molds and forms. If additional coverage for such property is needed, it can be purchased separately.

Earthquake and Volcano Coverage – You may add this endorsement to your BOP to protect your business property from losses due to these perils. A different method of calculating deductibles, as a percentage of the coverage rather than as a flat dollar amount, may apply to this coverage.

Electronic Commerce – If your business relies on e-commerce—that is, business activity conducted over the Internet—you may want to add the Endorsement for Electronic Commerce to your BOP. The insurer covers your lost income and extra expenses in the event your ability to conduct e-commerce is slowed down or stopped due to the causes of loss covered by the BOP. The endorsement also provides coverage for the cost of reconstructing electronic data if it is lost due to a covered cause of loss or if it is stolen by someone other than an employee, volunteer worker or contractor.

Employee Dishonesty – Burglary and robbery insurance does not cover losses caused by employees or authorized representatives who commit dishonest acts. Employee Dishonesty Insurance provides this coverage.

Most experts agree that businessowners tend to greatly underestimate their vulnerability to theft by their own employees. According to the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE), the average business loses 6 percent of its total annual revenue to employee fraud. The ACFE says smaller companies, particularly those with fewer than 500 employees, are most susceptible to these losses. Virtually any business with employees is at risk of losses caused by employee dishonesty. As with other causes of loss, effective loss control measures can go a long way toward reducing this loss exposure.

Employee Dishonesty Insurance covers losses caused by temporary or leased workers as well as employees. Many employee fraud schemes go on for years before they are detected. If you have added this coverage to your BOP, your insurer will pay for a covered loss or damage sustained during the policy period and discovered no later than one year from the end of the policy period.

Food Contamination – If you are involved in a food business, there is always some risk that food you sell could cause food poisoning or transmit a communicable disease from an employee of your business. This risk can, of course, be reduced and controlled by following a good risk management plan, but it can never be totally eliminated.

The Endorsement for Food Contamination provides coverage for most of the expenses you would incur if food you sold caused food poisoning or disease. Coverage includes the cost of additional advertising to restore your reputation.

Mechanical Breakdown – This option provides coverage for mechanical or electrical breakdown to your boilers, pressure vessels, refrigeration systems, piping, and mechanical and electrical machines or apparatus that generate, transmit or simply use mechanical or electrical power. For many businesses that depend on such equipment, a breakdown means the inability to operate and loss of income. If you run a sawmill and the saw breaks down, for example, you’re effectively out of business until the saw is repaired. Mechanical breakdown coverage might be a wise investment to cover this type of risk.

Money and Securities – You have the option to add coverage for money and securities to your policy. The insurer covers the property on the business premises, while it is at a bank or savings institution, when it is in the custody of any employee or businessowner in his or her living quarters or while it is in transit between any of these places.

More Coverage for Valuable Papers and Records – As part of your loss control plan, to the extent feasible, you should keep backup copies of records in a separate location and valuable papers in a fire proof safe or a bank safety deposit box.

For some businesses, however, it may be in the nature of the business that certain valuable papers and records are vulnerable to property loss. Should you lose valuable papers and records as the result of a covered cause of loss, your basic BOP will pay the expense, up to your policy limit, to reconstruct the records.

If needed, you may add more coverage to your BOP for the cost to reconstruct valuable papers and records, including those that exist on electronic media. The covered property includes documents, manuscripts and records (including abstracts, books, deeds, drawings, films, maps or mortgages). It also includes electronic data processing, recording or storage media; data stored on such media; and programming records used for electronic data processing or electronically controlled equipment.

Newly Acquired or Constructed Property – If your policy covers buildings, you may extend the coverage to newly acquired buildings intended for similar use as the insured building or as a warehouse. This coverage also applies to new buildings while being constructed on the premises described in your policy. Any newly acquired business personal property is also covered. This is temporary coverage that provides time to report the new property to your insurer. The coverage expires 30 days after you acquire the property or begin construction.

Outdoor Property – You may extend your policy’s coverage to apply to outdoor items, including signs, fences, shrubs and plants, and satellite dishes. Debris removal of these items is included. The most the insurer will pay under this extension is $2,500 and not more than $500 for any one tree, shrub or plant.

Outdoor Signs – For some businessowners, the only outdoor asset not covered by their basic BOP that they wish to insure is outdoor signs not connected to their building. The BOP provides an option to add just this coverage.

Personal Effects – You may extend your coverage to apply to personal effects owned by officers, managers and anyone who works at the company. There is a $2,500 limit on this coverage. It does not apply to loss or damage by theft.

Spoilage Coverage – If you are in a business that involves supplies, inventory or other materials that must be maintained under controlled temperature or humidity conditions for preservation and that are susceptible to loss or damage if the controlled temperature or humidity conditions change, you will probably want to add the Endorsement for Spoilage Coverage to your BOP. The covered causes of loss are mechanical breakdown of your refrigeration or humidity control system and power outages due to conditions beyond your control. The insurer will cover the cost of property that is spoiled by these causes.

Utility Services—Direct Damage – Loss of water, communication or power service could be costly to many businesses. The Endorsement for Utility Services—Direct Damage will cover the loss caused by inter.
Most people need homeowner’s insurance because their home is their single most expensive asset, which, if lost, would create financial hardship for most people. Also, virtually all mortgage lenders require that the mortgagor buy insurance to cover their security for the loan.

Most homeowner policies cover the dwelling, other structures on the property, the contents of the dwelling and other structures, and will also pay for living expenses if the primary residence is uninhabitable. Most also provide personal liability insurance.

Homeowner’s insurance was first introduced in the 1950s. Today, most homeowners’ insurance policies are based on forms developed by the Insurance Services Office (ISO) and the American Association of Insurance Services (AAIS). For commercial and personal lines of insurance, ISO provides:

statistical, actuarial, underwriting and claims information and analysis;
consulting and technical services;
policy language;
information about specific locations;
fraud-identification tools;
and data processing for insurers, reinsurers, agents, brokers, self-insureds, risk managers, and insurance regulators and other government agencies.
While some insurers use their own forms, most of these are similar to ISO forms. The most recent homeowners’ insurance policies are based on the Homeowners 2000 Program (HO 2000), which incorporated changes to make the policy more compliant with court decisions and to accommodate changing lifestyles since the last revision in 1991. The rest of the information presented is based on the HO 2000 policies.

Homeowner’s insurance is available for 1- to 4-family dwellings. No more than 2 families or 2 boarders may occupy any single residence. Although homeowner’s insurance is for private residences only, certain businesses can be included, such as day care or home offices established for a business or profession; however, it does not cover professional liability, which should be purchased as a separate policy. There are also different policies for condominium or cooperative owners and renters.A life insurance policy is a valued insurance policy that pays a specified amount to the beneficiary, when the insured dies. A beneficiary can be a person, business, trust, or estate. The owner of the policy is the person or organization who pays the premiums and has ownership rights: the right to name the beneficiary; the right to receive dividends and to surrender the policy for cash; the right to change ownership; and the right to assign a policy as collateral for a loan.

So that life insurance companies can make a profit, they must engage in both medical and financial underwriting. Medical underwriting generally requires that the insurance applicant receive a physical exam to determine the health of the applicant as well as supply medical information on the insurance application. An applicant in poor health would probably have to pay higher premiums or the company may refuse to insure the individual at all. Financial underwriting requires that the company determine that the beneficiary would suffer a loss if the insured died, if the beneficiary is also the owner of the policy. Otherwise, the beneficiary would not have insurable interest, since state law does not permit anyone to take out life insurance policies on other people unless they would suffer a financial loss if the insured died. So, for instance, spouses would have insurable interest to insure each other, a partnership would have an insurable interest in insuring its partners, and a company could purchase life insurance on its key employees.

Death is certain, but when it occurs is not. Life expectancy is the average number of years that a person can expect to live. For people with a given life expectancy, half will die before then and half will die afterward. If someone dies early, then they may leave behind a family or other financial dependents that depended on the decedent's income.Premature death is, for insurance purposes, the unexpected death of someone who provides financial support to others, and life insurance helps to provide that support.

There are pecuniary costs of premature death:

lost earnings,
funeral expenses and uninsured medical bills,
estate settlement costs,
and possible federal and state taxes on the estate.
Since life insurance is mainly used to provide financial support for the financial dependents of the decedent, life insurance is usually purchased only for the breadwinners of a family. If a family member provides no support, or if it is a single individual living alone, then there is generally no need for life insurance, except, maybe, to cover funeral costs.

Life insurance is a valued policy, not a contract of indemnification. Death is certain, only the time of its arrival is uncertain. After the death of the insured, the face amount of the policy is paid to the named beneficiary.People buy insurance to cover losses, but how much insurance companies pay depends on the contract and the amount of the loss. With some policies, the payout is easy to determine. Life insurance pays the face value of the policy when the insured dies. Liability insurance pays legal costs and any assessed liability damages up to the policy limit. Business income insurance pays for damages and losses in income because of the damage. However, determining the payout for property losses is more complicated; how much is paid is determined by the principle of indemnity.

Probably the most basic and fundamental principle of property insurance—and why property insurance even exists—is that of indemnity. The basic purpose of insurance is to cover a loss that an insured has suffered. Indemnity is the payment of a loss by the insurer to the insured, but for no more than the actual amount of the loss. Indemnity compensates the insured for loss, but does not allow the insured to make a profit out of the loss. A moral hazard would result if the insured could profit from a loss, possibly motivating the insured to actually cause the loss to make a profit, or a morale hazard would be created, causing the insured to be complacent in preventing a loss. Insurance that causes these hazards would be against public policy, and would drive up premiums to unaffordable prices. For the same reason, the insured cannot collect from multiple insurance policies, even from different companies, for the same loss.Ownership of real estate is evidenced by a real estate title, a legal document that specifies the owner of a particular piece of real estate. In title theory states, the law makes a distinction between the legal title, which is held by the lender for the property, and equitable title, which is held by the borrower. When the borrower pays off the loan, then he gains legal title as well. In lien theory states, in contrast, the lender only has a lien on the property, and must go through the process of foreclosure in case of default.

However, the title does not prove ownership. Because of legal complexities and specific procedures required to transfer title, someone other than the person specified in the title document could have a superior claim to the real estate. Title defects can result because of a defective probate or will, or even an incorrect description of the property or a gap in the title records of the property. There could also be unrecorded liens against the property, or other defects to the title, such as easements.

A certificate of title or an attorney's opinion of title is a statement of opinion about the title when the certificate is issued, and based on a title search of the public records, from which an abstract of title is prepared, which is a historical summary of all transactions that have affected the title of the property. It cannot and will not show hidden defects which are not recorded, such as unrecorded liens, forged documents, or rights of parties in possession.

Title insurance protects the buyer of property or the lender for the property against unknown defects in the title. For a one-time premium, the title insurance company, which is in the business of examining public records, preparing title abstracts, and selling title insurance, issues the insurance after doing a title search on the property. The company then issues a title binder (aka preliminary report of title) which describes the type of policy that will be issued, the name of the insured, the legal description of the real estate, the interest covered, conditions and stipulations, and all title exclusions which will include all known title defects.
NON-LIFE
Includes premiums (by type of contract), claims, technical provisions, operating expenses, number of insured persons, benefits and the net income investment.Definition of Non-life Insurance Life insurance is a pretty vivid reminder that "it's not all about you." It's something you have to have, but the benefit goes to your loved ones -- or perhaps, your creditors. Non-life insurance is a little more equitable, because you get to share in the benefits. Sometimes called general insurance or property and casualty coverage, it insures everything in your life except...your life. If you're ever injured, or if your home or car is wrecked, it's your non-life coverage that comes to the rescue.Non-life Insurance
Non-life insurance is a broad category, including on both people and things. Insurance companies and company-owned agencies typically specialize in one or the other, though individual brokers and brokerages have the option of dealing in multiple types of coverage. For example, a large brokerage might contain people specializing in life and disability, group and health plans, auto and homeowner's insurance, or liability coverage for professionals. Smaller brokerages are more likely to specialize in one or two lines of business. If your own broker doesn't sell everything you need, you can probably score a referral to another broker who's got what you want.

Coverage on You
Death isn't necessarily the worst thing that could happen to your household. Imagine the effects of a chronic, debilitating illness or a crippling accident. Not only is your income lost, but you become a financial liability. Health coverage, disability insurance, critical-illness insurance and many other products provide protection against these risks. Group plans, through an employer or other organization, can often provide a comprehensive package of these coverages at less than the cost of buying them separately. If you're in a professional partnership, "key-person" disability coverage can protect you and your partners if one becomes unable to work.

Home and Auto
Of course, coverage that protects you personally is only part of the picture. Car insurance is mandatory almost everywhere, and you need coverage on your home as well. Car policies run a wide range. If you drive an old "beater," a simple liability policy -- to protect other drivers -- is the legal minimum. Policies for more valuable cars cover damage from collisions, while comprehensive insurance adds theft coverage and damage from other causes. Homeowner's coverage will pay to rebuild or repair a home after major damage, though the aftermath of a standout party might not qualify. Specific hazards such as flooding and natural disasters might require separate coverage.

Everything Else
Those major categories of coverage are just the tip of the iceberg. There are lots of specialized types of non-life coverage. Professional liability is a thriving field, with malpractice insurance for doctors and errors and omissions coverage or "E&O" for lawyers and insurance agents themselves. Specialized policies cover risks such as tornadoes, hurricanes and earthquakes in affected areas. You can purchase policies on a boat or RV, or your world-class collection of Depression glass. Some companies even offer insurance against identity theft. Chances are, you can find a policy to cover almost any risk you might face.

A Short Course in Non-Life Insurance
(Philippine Setting)
Part 1: Introduction
1. DEFINITION OF INSURANCE
We define Insurance as “ a contract whereby one undertakes for a
consideration to indemnify another against loss, damage or liability
arising from an unknown or contingent event”. It is a social device
wherein the losses of a few are distributed among the many which
otherwise would be borne by the few. It is a scheme whereby one
substitutes a small definite loss for a large but uncertain loss under an
arrangement in which the fortunate many who escape loss will
compensate the unfortunate few.

2. NATURE OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
An insurance contract is an agreement under which one party is obligated
to make good the loss suffered by a second party through the occurrence
of a designated event. The event must be a fortuitous one or beyond the
control of either party.
A contract of insurance is an agreement, whereby one party on the one
hand called the Insurer undertakes for a consideration called the
premium to indemnify, one or more parties called the Insured against
loss, damage or liability arising from an unknown or contingent event.
3. ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Competent Parties – there must be a legal capacity to give
consent or to enter into contract.
b) Subject Matter – the subject or object must be within the
commerce of man and it must be lawful.
c) Offer and Acceptance – there must be meeting of the minds
between the two parties.
d) Consideration – there must be a payment of a premium to the
Insurer for the assumption of the risk.
e) Insurable Interest – there must be an economic loss to the
Insured at the happening of the contingency insured against.
4. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Good Faith – the doctrine of uberrimae fidei (utmost good faith)
meaning that any concealment or misrepresentation of a material fact
by the insured will invalidate the policy. 
b) Insurable Interest – is meant that interest which exists when the
insured will suffer a disadvantage if the contingency insured against
happens and will enjoy a benefit if the contingency insured against
fails to happen.
c) Indemnify – to make good a loss. This means to place the insured
in the same situation in which he was before the loss.
d) Subrogation – the right of an insurer to be substituted to any right
of action which the insured may have against a third person whose
negligence or wrongful act caused the loss or injury.
e) Contribution – means that if there is more than one policy in force
covering the same interest in the same subject matter against the
same peril, the insured shall not be entitled to recover more than full
amount of the loss.
f) Proximate Cause – that which in a natural and continuous
sequence, unbroken by any new independent cause, produces that
event and without which, that event would not have occurred.
5. MAJOR CLASSES OF GENERAL INSURANCE
a) Fire
b) Marine
aa. Marine Cargo
bb. Marine Hull
c) Motor Car
aa. Private Car
bb. Commercial Vehicle
cc. Land Transportation Operator
dd. Motorcycle
ee. Motor Trade
d) Personal Accident
e) Aviation
aa. Hull
bb. Liabilities
f) Engineering Insurance
aa. Contractors All Risks
bb. Erection All Risks
cc. Machinery Breakdown
g) Miscellaneous Casualty Lines
aa. Comprehensive General Liability 
A Short Course in Non-Life Insurance
(Philippine Setting)
Part 1: Introduction
1. DEFINITION OF INSURANCE
We define Insurance as “ a contract whereby one undertakes for a
consideration to indemnify another against loss, damage or liability
arising from an unknown or contingent event”. It is a social device
wherein the losses of a few are distributed among the many which
otherwise would be borne by the few. It is a scheme whereby one
substitutes a small definite loss for a large but uncertain loss under an
arrangement in which the fortunate many who escape loss will
compensate the unfortunate few.

2. NATURE OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
An insurance contract is an agreement under which one party is obligated
to make good the loss suffered by a second party through the occurrence
of a designated event. The event must be a fortuitous one or beyond the
control of either party.
A contract of insurance is an agreement, whereby one party on the one
hand called the Insurer undertakes for a consideration called the
premium to indemnify, one or more parties called the Insured against
loss, damage or liability arising from an unknown or contingent event.
3. ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Competent Parties – there must be a legal capacity to give
consent or to enter into contract.
b) Subject Matter – the subject or object must be within the
commerce of man and it must be lawful.
c) Offer and Acceptance – there must be meeting of the minds
between the two parties.
d) Consideration – there must be a payment of a premium to the
Insurer for the assumption of the risk.
e) Insurable Interest – there must be an economic loss to the
Insured at the happening of the contingency insured against.
4. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Good Faith – the doctrine of uberrimae fidei (utmost good faith)
meaning that any concealment or misrepresentation of a material fact
by the insured will invalidate the policy. 
b) Insurable Interest – is meant that interest which exists when the
insured will suffer a disadvantage if the contingency insured against
happens and will enjoy a benefit if the contingency insured against
fails to happen.
c) Indemnify – to make good a loss. This means to place the insured
in the same situation in which he was before the loss.
d) Subrogation – the right of an insurer to be substituted to any right
of action which the insured may have against a third person whose
negligence or wrongful act caused the loss or injury.
e) Contribution – means that if there is more than one policy in force
covering the same interest in the same subject matter against the
same peril, the insured shall not be entitled to recover more than full
amount of the loss.
f) Proximate Cause – that which in a natural and continuous
sequence, unbroken by any new independent cause, produces that
event and without which, that event would not have occurred.
5. MAJOR CLASSES OF GENERAL INSURANCE
a) Fire
b) Marine
aa. Marine Cargo
bb. Marine Hull
c) Motor Car
aa. Private Car
bb. Commercial Vehicle
cc. Land Transportation Operator
dd. Motorcycle
ee. Motor Trade
d) Personal Accident
e) Aviation
aa. Hull
bb. Liabilities
f) Engineering Insurance
aa. Contractors All Risks
bb. Erection All Risks
cc. Machinery Breakdown
g) Miscellaneous Casualty Lines
aa. Comprehensive General Liability 
bb. Scheduled Property Floater
h) Bonds
aa. Surety
bb. Fidelity
6. FORMS
a) Proposal – an application for cover or for a premium to be quoted.
It gives the Insurer full details of the risk against which insurance
protection is to be provided.
b) Cover Note – a document by which temporary cover is granted by
the Insurer to the Assured pending issuance of regular policy.
c) Policy – not the contract itself but evidence of the contract.
Main Sections

aa. Basic Data/Schedule
i Policy Number
ii Name of Insured
iii Amount Insured
iv Period of Insurance
v Insurance Rate
vi Amount of Premium
bb. Recital Clause or Preamble – spells out the parties to the contract, the
proposal as basis of the contract, the premium.
cc. Operative Clause – sets out the circumstances under which the
insurers are liable to the insured
dd. Exclusions Clause – enumerates the excepted risks in the coverage
ee. Conditions – sets out the rules which govern the application and
interpretation of the contract as a whole
ff. Attestation Clause – confirms that the insurers have authenticated the
contract by signature.
d) Endorsement – policy alterations refer to changes made after the
issuance of policies or at the time of issuance for the purpose of altering,
limiting, extending or clarifying any of the policy terms or conditions.
The usual method of effecting policy alterations is by way of
endorsements. An endorsement is defined as a written form of
agreement between the Insured and the Insurer entered into for the
purpose of modifying, limiting, extending, altering, correcting or clarifying 
policy terms, conditions or wordings or to incorporate additional or new
agreements.
7. RISK - it is possibility of loss or injury
8. PERILS - are the causes of loss. Their existence creates risks.
Fire, theft, death and sickness are perils.
9. HAZARDS
Hazards are the conditions of a risk that may create or increase the
chance of loss. The kinds of hazards are physical, moral and morale
hazards.
 10. PARTIES TO AN INSURANCE CONTRACT

 a) Insurer – any person, partnership, association or corporation duly
 authorized to transact business.
 b) Insured – anyone except a public enemy may be insured. 
Part 2: FIRE INSURANCE
1. DEFINITION
Fire Insurance is a contract whereby one (the insurer) promises, for a
consideration (the premium) to indemnify another, (the Assured) for direct loss
or damage of the latter’s property by fire or lightning.
2. POLICY TERM
Refers to the period of insurance, that is, the time limit within which a policy will
remain in force. Fire policies are usually written for a period of twelve (12)
months or one year and are therefore issued on an annual basis.
3. OPEN POLICY AND VALUED POLICY
The Standard Fire Policy is an open policy which means that in the event of loss,
whether total or partial, it is understood that the amount of loss shall be subject
to appraisal and the liability of the company, if established, shall be limited to the
actual loss, subject to applicable terms, conditions, warranties and clauses of the
policy, and in no case shall exceed the amount of the policy.
In contrast, valued policy is one which expresses on the face an Agreement that
the thing insured shall be valued at a specific sum. In the event of total loss, the
valuation on the policy is deemed to be conclusive between the parties, except
when there is fraud or error on the part of either party.
4. THE SUM INSURED
The sum insured is simply the insurer’s maximum liability and a basis on which
the premium is calculated; it is not an admission of the insurers of the value of
the property nor it is the amount which they should pay in the event of the loss,
unless there is a stipulation to this effect.
5. WHO MAY BE INSURED
a) Absolute or Registered Owner of Property
b) Part Owner or Joint Owner of Property
c) Mortgagor or Mortgagee
d) Lessor or Lessee
e) Bailee – to whom property has been entrusted 
6. WHAT MAY BE INSURED
a) Building (completed or under construction)
b) Contents
aa. Stocks in trade, goods or merchandise
bb. Machinery, equipment, spare parts, accessories and tools.
cc. Business or household appliances, utensils, furniture, fixtures and
fittings.
dd. Personal effects and belongings (money and jewelry excluded).
ee. Other materials, property, such as postage stamps, books, motor
vehicles and others.
7. DESCRIBING INSURED PROPERTY
a) Machinery and Equipment
“ On machineries and equipment of every kind and description …”
However, if certain specific machinery or equipment are to be insured
only, then such must definitely be specified so that the identity of that
particular machinery or equipment insured may be established in the
event of loss.
b) Stocks
“ On stocks in trade …” or “ on general merchandise of every kind and
description …”. It is however, advisable to name some of the stocks or
merchandise covered such as flour, rice, textiles etc.
c) Household Contents
i Household furniture, fixtures and fittings
ii Personal effects and belongings (excluding money and jewelry)
iii Electrical appliances
iv Books and magazines
v Kitchen utensils
vi Betterments and improvements
d) Business or Store Contents
i Stocks in trade
ii Business or store furniture, fixtures and fittings
iii Business machines and electrical appliances
iv Business equipment, betterments and improvements
v Office stationeries and supplies 
e) Office Contents
i Office furniture, fixtures and fittings
ii Office equipment, machines and electrical appliances
iii Office stationeries and supplies
iv Office betterments and improvements
8. LOCATION OF INSURED PROPERTY
The location of an insured property is given in the following sequence:
a) House Number and Name of the Street
b) House Number of the whole building of which the premises to be insured
forms a part
c) District, town, municipality or city
d) Province
e) District and Block Number, if any
9. PERILS COVERED BY FIRE INSURANCE POLICY
The following perils are covered in a Standard Fire Policy:
a) Fire (subject to certain exclusions)
b) Lightning, whether fire ensues or not
The following forms of damage are likewise covered:
a) Damage during or immediately following a fire caused by:
aa. Smoke or Scorching
bb. Falling walls and the like
b) Damage caused by fire brigade or other competent authority in the
discharge of their duty
c) Damage to property removed from a burning building in an effort to save
such property.
10. EXCLUSIONS
Some of the exclusions provided for in a fire policy are:
a) Inherent vice, process of decay 
b) War, invasion, act of foreign enemy, hostilities or warlike operations
(whether war be declared or not) civil war, mutiny, civil commotion,
insurrection, rebellion, revolution, military or usurped power.
c) Riot, strike, malicious action, impact by vehicle, forest fire
d) Earthquake, volcanic eruption, flood, inundation, windstorm, tempest,
water damage, removal of debris, consequential loss.
e) Nuclear reaction, nuclear radiation.
11. SPECIAL PERILS INSURANCE (EXTENDED COVER)
Some perils that are excluded as previously mentioned can also be covered by
paying an additional premium and is usually effected by the issuance of an
endorsement to the fire policy.
a) Earthquake
b) Typhoon and Flood
c) Riot and Strike
d) Loss or damage caused directly by impact of land vehicle or falling object.
e) Bursting or overflow of water tanks, apparatus or pipes.
12. PREMIUM PAYMENTS
Our Standard Fire Policy emphatically states that the insurance company does
not assume liability unless the premium is paid. The insurance company will
make good any loss after payment of premium.
13. POLICY CANCELLATIONS
A fire policy may be cancelled at the request of the Insured upon which the
unearned premium must be refunded. No reason need be given by the Insured.
14. RENEWALS
After a policy has been in force for one year, it may be renewed for another year
subject to mutual consent. In other words, both the insured and the insurance
company has the option to decide whether to renew or not. 
15. COVER NOTES
Sometimes applicants need insurance coverage very badly, but necessary details
or date are not available for the issuance of regular policies.
In such case, insurance companies may issue provisional certificates of insurance
coverage known as Cover Notes in which the basic or skeletal information is
listed.
However, cover notes are temporary in nature and must be replaced with regular
policies within sixty (60) days.
16. PROCEDURES OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
Generally speaking, whenever a fire loss occurs, the very first thing for an agent
to do would be to give written notice to the insurance company involved and to
inquire which adjuster or adjustment company the insurer has designated to
handle the claim.
After an adjuster conducted an on-site inspection, normally a claim form will be
given to the insured. There are many questions to be answered. Primarily, the
information would concern policy no., location of risk, property insured, date and
time of fire, origin and cause of fire, extent of loss, other insurances and the
amount of the claim. Claim form is to be subscribed and notarized.
The Insured may be required to submit supporting papers and documents to
prove his claim, such as income tax returns, building plans (in case of building
insurance), invoices, sales records and others.
After the adjusters having evaluated all the facts and circumstances surrounding
the fire, liability has to be admitted or denied in behalf of the insurance
company. If it were admitted, the adjuster would then proceed to negotiate with
the insured to determine the amount of compensation payable and to resolve
matters concerning salvage, if any. This would eventually lead to payment of
the loss.
If it were denied, then an official advice will have to be given of such denial. 
Part 3: MARINE INSURANCE
DEFINITION
Marine Insurance is an insurance against risks connected with navigation in which a
ship, cargo, freightage, profit or other insurable interest in movable property may be
exposed during a certain voyage or a fixed period of time.
1. CLASSES OF MARINE INSURANCE
Marine Insurance is classified according to the subject matter insured, as follows:
a) Cargo Insurance – this refers to insurance on goods or movables.
According to the Rules of Construction of Policy, the term goods means
goods in the nature of merchandise, and does not include personal
effects or provision and stores for use on board.
b) Hull Insurance – this refers to insurance on ship, i.e., hull and
machinery and specially covers loss of or damage to hull or machinery
directly caused by accidents in loading, discharging or shifting cargo or
fuel; explosions on shipboard or elsewhere; breakdown of or accident to
nuclear installations or reaction on shipboard or elsewhere bursting of
boilers, breakage of shafts or any latent defect in the machinery or hull;
contact with an aircraft; negligence of master, officers, crew or pilots
provided such loss or damage has not resulted from want of due
diligence by the assured, owners or managers.
c) Freight Insurance – as the name suggests, this refers to insurance on
freight. The rules for construction of policy defines freight as including
the profit derivable by shipowner from the employment of his ship to
carry his own goods or movables, as well as freight payable by a third
party, but does not include passage money. A freight insurance policy
covers a sum not exceeding 15% of the value of hull and machinery.
Loss of freight is recoverable if directly caused by the perils mentioned
above. In the event of a total loss of the insured vessel, the sum insured
shall be paid in full.
2. SOME OF THE PERILS INSURED AGAINST
The plain form of marine policy enumerates the perils insured against, as
follows: 
a) Fire – hardly needs definition. Damage due to fire, lightning, smoke,
scorching, damage done by water or by chemicals used in extinguishing
fire, are compensable.
b) Collision – loss or damage caused by the impact of vessel with another
or any stationary object (including ice).
c) Stranding – when in consequence of some accidental or unusual
occurrence, she comes in contact with the ground or other obstruction,
and remains hard fast upon it. It may be on the rocks, on piles which
have been driven into the harbour bed, and so forth.
d) Grounding – this is almost similar to stranding. This is a situation where
ship or vessel cannot move as it has struck bottom. Vessel, however, has
not sunk.
e) Sinking – this is a situation where ship or vessel goes underneath the
surface of the water. In respect of sinking, it must generally be of such a
nature that the vessel is completely covered with water. If the vessel
could still be further immersed, there is no sinking.
3. MARINE CARGO INSURANCE
a) Types of Policy
aa. Open Policy – a continuous contract covering automatically all
shipments within certain geographical limits for an indefinite
period of time subject to cancellation by either party.
bb. S. G. Form (Ship-goods) – covers only one shipment or voyage.
b) Particulars of a Marine Cargo Policy
aa. Name and address of assured
bb. Amount of Insurance and Value of Goods
cc. Full description of cargo
dd. Type of packing – no. of crates/packing/boxes
ee. Marks and Numbers
ff. Name of Vessel
gg. Loading/Sailing/Arrival Dates
hh. Ports of Origin and Destination
ii. Consignee, if other than proposer or shipper
jj. Terms and conditions of insurance
kk. Bill of Lading
ll. Negotiating Bank and Letter of Credit
mm. Place of Settlement and/or Payment of Claim 
4. TYPES OF COVERAGES (Old Clauses)
An Insured may choose the type of coverage he wants depending on his
particular needs. The following are the coverages available:
a) Total loss by total loss of vessel only this is the most restricted cover. In
order for a claim to arise, the vessel carrying the cargo has to be a total
loss and the cargo impossible to save except at a cost exceeding the
value of the salvaged cargo.
b) Total Loss Only – interest must have been totally lost by one of the perils
enumerated in the policy.
c) Free from Particular Average (FPA) – loss of a part of a whole shipment
which is not a total loss is not covered (old clauses)
Losses Allowed:
aa. Total and/or constructive total loss
bb. Total loss of any apportionable part or a distinct species, if the
whole shipment is composed of several species.
cc. Total loss of any package in loading, transhipment or discharge.
dd. Direct liability for general average sacrifice
ee. General average contributions
ff. Salvage charges
gg. Particular charges whenever recoverable under a policy covering
particular average.
hh. Sue and labor charges
ii. Particular average irrespective of percentage if the vessel or craft
be stranded, sunk or burnt, and so forth.
d) With Average (WA) – under this, particular average and other loss or
damage are recoverable in all circumstances in which they are admitted
under FPA. All other particular average arising from perils insured against
is payable if it attains the percentage specified in the policy. (old clauses)
e) Against All Risks – all losses that are payable under the WA are covered
as well as losses from the additional coverages such as: (old clause)
aa. Theft, pilferage, and non-delivery
bb. Leakage and breakage
cc. Fresh water damage
dd. Sweat and mold
ee. Hook damage
All risks does not cover faulty manufacture, inherent vice or delay. 
5. BASIC MARINE CARGO COVERS NEW CLAUSES – (For Air and Water
Transport)
A) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “C”
1. Perils Covered
Loss of or damage to the subject-matter insured reasonably
attributable to:
a. Fire or explosion
b. Vessel or craft being stranded grounded sunk or capsized
c. Overturning or derailment of land conveyance
d. Collision or contact of vessel craft or conveyance with any
external object other than water
e. Discharge of cargo at a port of distress
f. General average sacrifice
g. Jettison
2. Duration of Cover
Warehouse at the port of loading up to delivery to warehouse at
port of destination, or upon the lapse of fifteen (15) days counting
from the date the cargo landed at port of discharge, WHICHEVER
SHALL FIRST OCCUR.
3. Clauses and Warranties under Clauses “C”
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “C” 1/1/82
b. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
c. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78
(not applicable for air transport)
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (For overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause. (For inter-island shipment)
4. Goods and merchandise allowed for clauses “C” cover:
a. shipment of powder like cement, wheat, flour, etc.
b. Rice and grains
c. Salt, sugar, tobacco, seeds
d. Copper and copper products
e. Non-flammable chemicals
f. Non-flammable liquids
g. Frozen fish and meat products
h. Vegetable and other food items 
B) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “B”
1. Perils Covered
Loss of or damage to the subject-matter insured reasonably
attributable to:
a. All clauses “C” perils, plus
b. Earthquake, volcanic eruption or lightning
c. Washing overboard
d. Entry of sea lake or river water into vessel craft hold
conveyance container liftvan or place of storage
e. Total loss of any package lost overboard or dropped whilst
loading on to, or unloading from, vessel or craft.
2. Duration of Cover
(Same as CLAUSES “C”)
3. Clauses and Warranties under clauses “B”
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “B” 1/1/82
b. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
c. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78 (not applicable for air
transport)
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (for overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause. (for inter-island shipment)
4. Goods and merchandise allowed for clauses “B”
a. Automobiles and trucks and other motor vehicle
b. Native handicrafts
c. Textiles and clothings
d. Paper/plastic products
C) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “A” OR ALL RISKS
1. Perils Covered
All types of loss or damage except:
a. Inherent Vice – the natural tendency of some items to
effect a chemical reaction within themselves to as to make
them physically unusable for the intended purposes. e. g.
decay in case of fruits and vegetables, rotting in case of
fresh meat, spontaneous combustion in the case of copra. 
b. Delay – frequently occurring in shipments of chemicals
due to prolonged storage at the piers, the chemicals could
lose their potency.
2. Duration of Cover
(Same as in clauses “B” and “C”)
3. Clauses and Warranties under Clauses “A” or All Risks
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “A” 1/1/82
b. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78 (not applicable for air
transport)
c. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (for overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause (for inter-island shipment)
f. Institute Theft, Pilferage and Non-Delivery (Insured Value)
Clause 16/7/28
g. Nuclear Exclusion Clause
4. Goods and Merchandise allowed for ALL RISKS cover as
follows:
a. Steel machineries and spare parts
b. Steel products
D) TOTAL LOSS ONLY
1. Perils Covered
Total loss of the entire cargo due to perils insured against.
2. Duration of Cover
From the time cargo is admitted onboard the vessel until unloaded
therefrom at the port of destination or upon the lapse of seven (7)
days counting from the date cargo landed at port of discharge,
whichever shall first occur. 
3. Clauses and Warranties under TLO
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
b. Typhoon Clause
c. Overloading Warranty
d. Nuclear Exclusions Clause
e. Seven (7) days clause
E) TOTAL LOSS BY TOTAL LOSS OF THE VESSEL ONLY (TL/TLVO)
1. Perils Covered
Total loss of the entire cargo arising from total loss of the vessel.
The proximate cause should be perils of the sea.
2. Scope of Cover
Whilst on board the vessel

3. Clauses and Warranties under TL/TLVO
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
b. Typhoon Clause
c. Overloading Warranty
d. Nuclear Exclusions Clause
F) LAND TRANSPORT
1. Perils Covered – Loss or damage arising from the following:
a. Fire, including self-ignition and internal explosion of the
conveyance.
b. Accidental collision of the vehicle with any other
automobile, vehicle or object excluding, however, contact
with any portion of the road bed, curbing, any stationary
object while backing for loading or unloading or rails or
ties of street and excluding collision of the load with any
object when such collision of the load with any object does
not involve collision of the carrying truck. 
c. Overturning or upset of the motor truck
d. Explosion
e. Collapse or subsidence of bridges
f. Flood (meaning rising of navigable waters), lightning,
cyclone, tornado, landslide, earthquake and volcanic
erruption.
2. Scope of Cover
Whilst in transit on board the truck.
3. Clauses and Warranties under Truck Risks Clause
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
6. LOSSES
a) Total Loss
aa. Actual Total – a material and physical loss of the subject matter
insured.
bb. Constructive Total – commercial loss of the subject matter
insured is reasonably assumed if more than ¾ of the value is
actually lost.
b) Partial Loss
Any other loss not considered total.
c) General Average Loss
Loss due to a general average act – when any extra-ordinary sacrifice or
expenditure is voluntarily and reasonably made or incurred in the time of
peril for the purpose of preserving the property imperilled in the common
adventure 
1. CLAIMS PROCEDURE
In the event of loss or damage, it is the duty of the assured to safeguard his
insured cargo and he is required under his marine cargo policy, as follows:
a) To claim immediately on the carriers, Port Authorities or other Bailee for
any missing package.
b) To apply immediately for survey by carrier’s or other Bailees’
Representative if any loss or damage be apparent and claim on the
Carriers or other Bailees for any actual loss or damage found at such
survey.
c) In no circumstances, except under written protest, to give clean receipts
where goods are in doubtful condition.
d) To give notice in writing to the Carriers or other Bailees within three (3)
days of delivery if the loss or damage was not apparent at the time of
taking delivery.
2. In general, the documents required by a marine insurer to be produced
by the assured for purposes of substantiating a loss under the policy
are the following:
a) Marine Cargo Policy
b) Supplier’s Invoice
c) Supplier’s Packing List
d) Bill of Lading
e) Certificate of Bad Order
f) Certificate of Short-Delivery
g) Certificate of Non-Delivery
h) Certificate of Short-Landing
i) Certificate of Survey
j) Correspondence exchange between the assured and Bailees 
Part 4: MOTOR CAR INSURANCE
Motor Vehicle (Auto) Insurance, defined
- any kind of insurance pertaining to the ownership, maintenance or use of motor
vehicle.
Two (2) Major Divisions of Auto Insurance Coverage
1. Physical or Material Damage Coverage
This is the insurance that protects the insured from loss or damage to the car
itself. Example of covered losses are as follows:
a. Collision or overturning
b. Fire, lightning, self-ignition
c. External explosion
d. Burglary, theft
e. Malicious act, other than by the insured
f. Whilst being transported by road, rail, inland transit, lift or elevator.
2. Casualty Coverage – refers to the liability and personal accident coverage
afforded under the motor car policy; consists of the following sub-groupings:
a. Bodily Injury Liability
b. Property Damage Liability the insured shall become legally obligated to
pay for injury and/or damage to property belonging to others caused by
accident, arising from the use, ownership and maintenance of the insured
vehicle, subject to policy limits.
c. Personal Accident – this covers death or injuries to occupants of the
vehicle resulting from accident whilst boarding, riding or alighting from
the insured vehicle, regardless of liability.
Five (5) Motor Vehicle Policy Forms in Use:
1. Private Car Policy Form - for private use cars
2. Commercial Vehicle Form - for vehicles used for carriage of own goods and
for domestic and social purposes
3. Motor Trade Policy - this is the policy for motor car dealers for vehicles whilst
on display and on demonstration 
4. Motor Cycle Policy - for motorcycles and tricycles
5. Land Transportation Operators Policy - for vehicles used for carriage of
passenger and cargo for hire or reward.
Automotive equipment not belonging under these classifications (e.g. mobile crane,
bulldozer, road grader, road roller, farm tractor, etc.) are insured under Inland Floater
Policy.
BRIEF DISCUSSION OF PRINCIPAL POLICY CONDITIONS
1) Recital Clause
“Whereas the Insured by his corresponding proposal and declaration and which
shall be the basis of this contract and is deemed to be incorporated herein has
applied to the Company for the insurance hereinafter contained, subject to the
payment of the premium as consideration for such insurance.”
Two (2) terms in this Recital Clause must be noted:
a. Proposal Form
It is common practice in the insurance of motor vehicle to insist upon the
completion of a written proposal form setting out the details of the risk and it will
be observed that this proposal is incorporated in the policy and thus made part
of the policy. Any material misrepresentation may adversely affect the validity of
the policy.
b. Premium – The Insurance Code provides:
1. “Sec. 77. An insurer is entitled to payment of the premium as soon as
the thing insured is exposed to the peril insured against. Notwithstanding
any agreement to the contrary, no policy or contract of insurance issued
by an insurance company is valid and binding unless and until the
premium thereof has been paid, except in the case of a life or an
industrial life policy whenever the grace period provisions applies.
2. Under Sec. 64 of the Insurance Code, non-payment of the premium is
one of the grounds that allows an insurance company to cancel a policy.
2) Section I – LIABILITY TO THE PUBLIC
a. Principal provision – to pay all sums necessary to discharge liability of the
insured in respect of bodily injury and/or death to any THIRD PARTY, in
an accident caused by or arising out of the use of the scheduled vehicle
provided that the insured’s liability shall have first been determined. 
Essential Elements
1. the purpose is to indemnify the insured
2. there must be an accident
3. the accident must have been caused by or arose out of the use of
the motor vehicle
4. the insured must be legally liable.
b. Limits of Liability – as specified in the schedule in accordance with the
law.
c. Who are protected – (1) Insured and (2) Authorized driver
d. Extended Protection – This insurance protection covers the insured even
when personally driving another private car not belonging to him and not
hired by him under a hire purchase agreement.
e. Note that this policy provisions is in compliance with the Compulsory
Motor Vehicle insurance law.
3) Section II – NO FAULT INDEMNITY
a. Policy Provision – the insurance company will pay any claim for bodily
injury and/or death to any THIRD PARTY or passenger without the
necessity of proving fault or negligence of any kind.
b. Conditions
1. total indemnity of any one third-party-not to exceed P10,000
subject to schedule of indemnities.
2. Proof of loss, under oath:
a. Police report of accident or any evidence sufficient to
establish the accident.
b. Medical report and evidence of medical or hospital
expenses; and/or
c. Death Certificate and evidence sufficient to establish the
proper payee.
c. Who will pay No-Fault
1. Claim must be made against only one vehicle owner or insurer.
2. If third party is occupant of a vehicle – insurer of vehicle in which
he is riding, mounting or dismounting will pay “No-Fault”.
3. In any other case – insurer of the directly offending vehicle will
pay. 
4) Section III – LOSS OR DAMAGE
This part of the policy protects the vehicle described in the schedule, its
accessories and spare parts.
a. The CAUSES of loss or damage covered by the Policy
1. accidental collision or overturning
2. accidental collision or overturning consequent upon mechanical
breakdown or consequent upon wear and tear.
3. Fire, external explosion, self-ignition or lightning or
4. burglary, house breaking or theft.
5. Malicious act.
6. Whilst in transit (including the process of loading and unloading)
accidental to transit by road, rail, inland waterway, lift or
elevator).
b. Methods of Indemnity – At the OPTION of the INSURANCE COMPANY:
1. Pay in cash the amount of loss or damage
2. Repair, Reinstate
3. Replace the vehicle
Conditions:
1. Insurer’s liability shall not exceed the cost of the parts or
damaged and the reasonable cost of fitting such parts or value of
the vehicle at the time of the loss.
2. Insured’s estimate of value of the vehicle as stated in the
schedule of the policy will be the maximum amount payable.
3. For the cost of replacement parts, the amount of settlement shall
be the cost of brand new part(s) to replace. The damage parts
less the following depreciation schedule (not applicable in case of
total loss).
For Private Cars
Age of Vehicle
Rate of
Depreciation
(share of the
insured)
Age of Vehicle
Rate of Depreciation
(share of the
Insured)
Up to 3 years Nil Over 6 years up to 7 years 35%
Over 3 years up to 4 years 20% Over 7 years 40%
Over 4 years up to 5 years 25% Batteries, Tires, Ball
Over 5 years up to 6 years 30% Joint, Tie Rods, & Shock
Absorbers
45% 
For Commercial Vehicles
Age of Vehicle
Rate of
Depreciation
(share of the
insured)
Age of Vehicle
Rate of Depreciation
(share of the
Insured)
Up to 3 years Nil Over 6 years up to 7 years 40%
Over 3 years up to 4 years 25% Over 7 years 45%
Over 4 years up to 5 years 30% Rebuilt & Reconditioned
Vehicle 45%
Over 5 years up to 6 years 35% Batteries, Tires, Ball
Joint, Tie Rods, & Shock
Absorbers
50%
5) Section IV – EXCESS LIABILITY INSURANCE
This additional insurance, if requested, must be specified in the policy and the
premium for such coverage must be paid.
This is the part of the policy that covers LIABILITY of the Insured which are not
covered under Section I because of the limits in the schedule.
a. Policy Provision
1. The Insurance Company will reimburse the insured for all sums actually
paid by the Insured to discharge liability in accordance with all the
provisions of Section I except the limits of liability for Section I but only in
excess of:
a. the limits of liability of Sections I and II when such limits have
been exhausted, or
b. the liability limits required for scheduled vehicle under Section 377
of the Insurance Code in the event no coverage exists as
described in par.(a)
2. The Company will pay all sums necessary to discharge liability of the
insured in respect of Damage to property in an accident caused by or
arising out of the use of the scheduled vehicle or in connection with the
loading or unloading of the scheduled vehicle.
Provided that:
a. Insured’s liability shall have first been determined either
- by final court judgment after actual trial, or
- by written agreement of insured, the claimant, and the
 insurance company 
b. The Company shall not be liable in respect of damage to property
belonging to the Insured, or held in trust by, or in the custody or
control of the insured or any member of the Insured’s household
or being conveyed by the scheduled vehicle.
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS UNDER ANY SECTION
The following are not covered by the Policy:
1. Liability incurred outside the Philippines
2. Accident or liability whilst the vehicle is
- being used otherwise than in accordance with the limitations as to use.
 - being driven by any person other than an Authorized Driver.
3. Liability by virtue of an agreement but which would not have attached in the
absence of agreement (except amicable settlement on minor accident to avoid
impairing flow of traffic).
4. Except claims under Sec. I and II, any loss, damage or liability, DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY, PROXIMATELY OR REMOTELY occasioned by, contributed to by or
traceable to or ARISING OUT OF, or IN CONNECTION with
- flood, typhoon, hurricane
 - volcanic eruption, earthquake or other convulsion of nature
- invasion, the act of foreign enemies, hostilities or warlike operations (whether
 war be declared or not)
- civil commotion, mutiny, rebellion, insurrection, military or usurped power
- or by any direct or indirect consequences of any of said occurrences
 The burden of proof for claim during the above circumstances is on the insured.
5. Any sum the insured could recover were it not for an agreement between the
insured and other party.
6. Bodily injury or death of:
- any person in the employ of the insured
 - any member of insured’s household who is riding in the vehicle 
IMPORTANT CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SECTIONS
The following are conditions the Insured must know:
1. Notice – Every notice or communication regarding this policy must be
delivered in writing to the Company.
2. Safeguard of Vehicle – The Insured shall
- take reasonable steps to safeguard from loss or damage.
 - maintain the vehicle in efficient condition.
- not leave the vehicle unattended without proper precautions to prevent
 further loss or damage in the event of any accident or breakdown.
- in case of theft or other criminal act which may give rise to a claim,
 give immediate notice to police and cooperate with the Company in
 securing conviction.
3. Notice of Claim
The insured shall, as soon as possible, give notice to the Company with
full particulars.
Every letter, claim, writ, summons and process shall be notified and
forwarded to the Company immediately on receipt.
4. Admission, Offer, Promise or Payment
No admission, offer, promise or payment shall be made by or on behalf of
the insured without the written consent of the Company.
5. Relinquish Conduct of Defense
The Company may pay to the Insured and the Third Party Claimant
jointly the full amount of the Company’s liability and relinquish the
conduct of any defense, settlement or proceedings.
6. Cancellations
Both the insurance company and the insured has the right to have the
policy cancelled.
7. In case of difference or dispute as to amount of Company’s liability,
arbitration is condition precedent to any action or suit upon the policy. 
Part 5: ACCIDENT & HEALTH INSURANCE
A. Hazards to which Income – Earning Individuals (Income Producers)
are subject:
1. Premature Natural Death – or dying too soon
2. Economic Death – or living too long
3. Disability Due to accident
4. Disability Due to Illness
B. Insurances for the physical and economic well-being of individuals
Life Insurance is the instrument which affords protection against the first two
hazards. By means of its policies, the family is guaranteed against the economic
consequences of the husband’s or father’s death, and the insured himself is
protected against the time when his earning days are over that the he becomes
a burden to the family.
Disability Insurance finds its uses in continuing the income of the insured during
the time when by reason of injury or illness he is unable to work. It has also a
collateral function in indemnifying the insured against the heavy additional
expenses which disability always entails.
Personal Accident (PA) Insurance – is that particular type of insurance which
provides benefits/indemnity in case of losses to the person or physical well-being
of an insured individual arising out of accident.
Types of Losses that can be sustained by the individual from accident and types
of Benefits available.
1. Accidental Loss of Life – Lump sum called Principal Sum
2. Accidental Loss of Limb or sight – Lump sum called Capital Sum
3. Loss of Income – Fixed cash benefits usually payable on weekly basis
4. Medical Expense – Medical Reimbursement
Health Insurance – includes a variety of individual and group coverage whose
basic purpose is to reimburse the cost of medical treatment and replace the lost
income in case of illness or injuries.
Forms of Health Insurance:
1) Basic Hospital Expense Insurance
2) Basic Surgical Expense Insurance
3) Physician’s Attendance Benefit
4) Major Medical Expense Insurance 
C. Underwriting – unlike in property insurance where an ocular inspection of the
risks being insured can be made prior to binding of coverage, the personal
accident underwriter usually has just to content himself with an accomplished
application form to form a picture of the person he is insuring.
The application form for PA insurance usually provides for at least the following
information:
1. Name 6. Beneficiary
2. Age 7. Health Status
3. Sex 8. Insurance History
4. Address 9. Existing Insurance
5. Occupation 10. Signature
Occupational Classification – The exposure of a person to accident is a function
of the type of work he does or his occupation.
4 Major Occupational Classes:
Class I - Non-hazardous occupation with office or travel duties
Class II - Limited occupational exposure
Class III - Skilled and semi-skilled with moderate occupational
exposure
Class IV - Skilled and semi-skilled with extensive occupational
exposure
D. Application of Fundamental Insurance Principles on Accident and
Health Insurance
1. Utmost Good Faith. Although both parties to the proposed insurance
contract are bound by this doctrine, the duty of disclosure is more exacting
on the person applying for insurance. The prospective insured alone knows,
or should know, all the material facts that will have bearing on his
acceptability for this type of insurance, and it is his duty to disclose them.
2. Indemnity. A personal accident policy, as a rule, is not a contract of
indemnity but a benefit policy. Under a contract of indemnity, the amount
recoverable is measured by the extent of the insured’s financial loss. On the
other hand, a benefit policy is a contract to pay a sum of money in the event
of certain contingency, it is however wrong to state that a personal accident
policy is never a contract of indemnity. An employer may undertake to pay
an employee full wages in the event of his disablement and insure his liability
to do so. This is a contract of indemnity and the usual consideration applies. 
In practice, the principle of indemnity is preserved as fas as possible by not
granting higher benefits than those justified by the applicant’s financial
standing. Whenever possible, if the sums insured seem large for a person of
a particular occupation and age, tactful inquiries should be made to see
whether he might be better off disabled than when working.
3. Subrogation. The right of subrogation, by which insurers run after Third
Parties causing the loss, arises only from a contract of indemnity. Since the
great majority of personal accident policies are not contracts of indemnity,
subrogation does not apply. This means that an insured may collect the
benefits payable under his policy and, in addition, claim against a negligent
third party, receiving compensation from him as though no benefit had been
received from any insurance.
4. Contribution. This, like subrogation, does not apply where the contract is not
one of indemnity. An insured may hold several personal accident policies and
is entitled to the full benefits of each. The total insurance benefits from the
several sources could therefore be far in excess of the insured’s usual
income. A safeguard is sometime provided by requiring the proposer to
disclose particulars of any other insurances held, so that it may be confirmed
that the combined benefits correspond to the proposer’s income.
5. Insurable Interest. This is always necessary for a valid insurance contract.
An individual is deemed to have an unlimited interest in his own person. In
many personal accident contracts, therefore, insurable interest presents no
problem, but the principle calls for special consideration if the insurance is
taken on another person. Examples are an employer who insures his
employees, or a wife who insures her husband. In most insurance contracts,
the insured must have an insurable interest at the time of loss, but with
personal accident insurance and life insurance, it is thought to be sufficient if
there was a valid interest when the policy was issued or when it was last
renewed.
6. Proximate Cause. The doctrine of proximate cause is important in dealing
with personal accident claims, because more than one cause may operate to
produce the condition resulting in the claim. It must then be ascertained
whether the dominant and effective cause was an insured peril on one which
was excluded from the contract.
As an example, an insured suffers from gall stones, is knocked down by a
motor car and dies, although but for the gall stones he would not have died.
His death is not an accident within the policy (Cawley V. National Employers,
1885).
E. The Policy Form.
The policy form to be considered in this lesson is that in general use for annual
contracts. The wording and arrangement of the principal clauses vary with
insurers. There are two forms existing: the Continental or British form and the 
American form. One clear difference between the two is in the scale of
Indemnities for non-death losses. The continental form defines “loss” as
meaning amputation or loss of use, whereas the American form defines it as only
actual severance or dismemberment. The constituent parts of a Personal
Accident policy is the same as other policies, earlier discussed and need not be
repeated here. 
Part 6: AVIATION INSURANCE
1. DEFINITION
Aviation insurance is an insurance against risk of loss or liability which may be
incurred in connection with the ownership or operation of an aircraft.
2. TYPES OF COVERAGES
a) Hull Insurance - provides coverage for actual physical loss of or
damage to the insured aircraft from fire, explosion, windstorm, theft,
crash or other causes while in flight, taxiing, moored or on the ground.
b) Liability Insurance
aa. Third Party Liability - indemnifies the insured in respect of all
sums which the latter may be legally held liable for death and/or
bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership or
operation of the aircraft.
bb. Passenger Legal Liability - protects the insured against legal
liability arising out of the death or injury of any passenger whilst
boarding, in or disembarking from the aircraft.
cc. Passenger Admitted Liability - (sometimes called Passenger
Voluntary Settlement Endorsement) - pays benefits in respect of
accidental bodily injury sustained by any passenger even if the
owner or operator of the aircraft it not legally liable.
dd. Combined Single Limit Liability - as the title implies, the
coverage states the insurer’s maximum liability for any one or any
combination of the above coverage) other than Hull).
ee. Pilot Seat Accident Insurance - provides for accident
insurance covering any authorized pilot operating the aircraft at
the time of the occurrence which gives rise to a claim for bodily
injury or death of the pilot.
ff. Medical Expense Reimbursement - provides for
reimbursement of medical, hospital or surgical expenses incurred
due to any accident resulting in death or bodily injury to
passengers or pilot. 
3. UNDERWRITING INFORMATION
a) Description of Aircraft
aa. Airframe
i Make, Type and Series Number
ii Year of Manufacture
iii Declared Maximum Number of Passengers to be carried at
any one time
iv Identification Marks
bb. Engine
i Number and Type
cc. Extra Equipment and Accessories
dd. Values
i Aircraft with standard instruments and equipment
ii Details of extra equipment and accessories
b) Geographical Limit - Republic of the Philippines
c) Pilot - The aircraft will be operated in flight only by a named pilot or as
approved by the assured subject to a certain number of flying hours.
d) Uses
aa. Business and Pleasure - personal, pleasure, family and
business uses excluding any operation for hire or reward or for
instruction.
bb. Industrial Aid - all the uses stated in business and pleasure
also the transportation of executives, employees, guests of the
insured, goods and merchandise but excluding any operation for
hire or reward or for instruction.
cc. Limited Commercial - all uses in business and pleasure and
industrial aid also the carriage of passengers and freight for hire
or reward but excluding any form of instructions or rental to
others.
dd. Commercial - all the uses stated in the foregoing also use for
any other purpose to be specifically declared. 
Part 7 MISCELLANEOUS INSURANCE
LINES: CRIME INSURANCE
A. Burglary, Robbery and Theft Insurance
Burglary, robbery and theft insurance pays for losses which are due to criminal
activities. For this reason, this line is often referred to as “Crime Insurance”.
There are a very large number of Crime policies however only a few of them are
completely standardized. The majority of them, though, use approximately the
same definitions.
B. Characteristic of Crime Policies
Certain characteristics differentiate Burglary, Robbery and Theft from other types
of policies:
1. The act insured against is a violation of the law;
2. There is a considerable amount of adverse selection and crime coverage
tends to be purchased only by persons who feel they are exposed to a high
degree of risk;
3. The crimes insured against are defined in the policy, and the policy definition
governs regardless of any statutory definition;
4. Policies are generally named-risk contracts. However, a few coverages are
written on an all-risk basis;
5. The property insured is often of high value, since it is natural for criminals to
attracted to especially valuable property;
6. Co-insurance is often required as a means of combating the tendency toward
underinsurance. First loss cover, however, may also be granted but at a high
premium rate.
C. Differences between Crime Coverages
1. As to the hazards covered, that is, burglary, robbery, theft, mysterious
disappearance, etc.
2. Whether coverage applies on the premises, off the premises, or both.
3. The type of property to the covered. Some contract limit the coverage to
stock only while others apply only to money and securities. 
4. Persons who are covered. Some contracts cover only specified persons such
as paymasters or messengers.
5. The manner in which the limits of liability apply. This concerns whether the
insurance is on blanket or scheduled basis.
6. Whether the property covered is personal, business, or professional property.
7. Whether the contract is written on a specified perils or all-risk basis.
D. Make-up of Burglary, Robbery and Theft Contracts
The usual crime policies are composed of four sections:
1. Declarations – contain information regarding the insured, his address, his
past losses, and such additional information as is necessary to properly
identify the insured and assist in rating the policy.
2. Insuring Agreement – sets out the circumstances under which the insurers
are liable to the insured and must be read in conjunction with the
declarations.
3. Exclusions – specify those types of property and those perils which are not
within the scope of the policy.
4. Conditions – cover such diverse matters as claims procedure, proofs of loss,
cancellation, other insurance, changes and the like.
E. Damage Caused by Criminal or attempted Criminal Acts
When premises are broken into by thieves, there is usually a certain amount of
damage to them. In some cases this may be negligible, while in others, it may be
very extensive. There are numerous cases where criminals frustrated in their
attempts at a theft, have deliberately wrecked the premises. It is the general
practice of all burglary, robbery and theft contracts to cover damage caused by
commission or attempted commission of an act which is covered by the policy.
Damage which results from an act not covered by the policy would of course, not
come within its scope. Thus a policy covering only robbery would not pay for
damage which resulted from an attempted burglary and vice- versa.
Definition of Terms
Crime coverages will usually contain a specific definition of the acts which are
covered. Burglary, robbery and theft are sometimes defined in different ways.
Therefore, it is necessary that the policy give as specific definition, so that there
may be no question as to what is included in the coverage. The following
definitions are taken from typical policies: 
1. Burglary - The felonious abstraction of property from within the premises, by
any person or persons making felonious entry therein by actual force and
violence when such premises are not open for business, of which there shall
be visible marks made upon the exterior of the premises at the place of such
entry by tools, explosives, electricity or chemicals.
2. Robbery - the felonious taking of insured property
(1) by violence inflicted upon a custodian,
(2) by putting him in fear of violence,
(3) by any other overt felonious act committed in his presence and of
which he is actually cognizant, provided such act is not committed
by an officer, partner of employee of the insured,
(4) from the person or direct care and custody of a custodian who has
been killed or rendered unconscious by injuries inflicted
maliciously or sustained accidentally.

3. Theft - Any act of stealing
4. Money - Means currency, coins, bank notes and bullion
5. Securities - All negotiable and non-negotiable instruments or contracts
representing either money or other property and includes revenue and other
stamps in current use, tokens, and tickets, but does not include money.
6. Business - Includes trade, profession, or occupation
7. Premises - There are different definitions of “premises” in various contracts
due to the fact that some are intended to cover only the immediate premises,
while other contain various extensions. Policies issued to cover business firms
often contain following definition of premises: “That portion of the interior of
any building or buildings which is occupied in whole or in part by the insured
in conducting its business”. (Where the contract is issued to cover the
personal activities of the insured, the policy will often define premises to
include grounds, garages, stables, and other outbuildings).
8. Insured - The policy definition varies from contract to contract. The major
distinction is whether the contract covers only the named insured or whether
it also applies to other persons. Crime coverages issued to individual often
include members of the insured family, while they are a resident of the
insured’s household, as well as the named insured. However, in such cases it
is customary to exclude resident employees, and persons unrelated to the
named insured. However, in such cases it is customary to exclude resident
employees, and persons unrelated to the named insured or his spouse who
pay board or rent to the insured or his spouse.
9. Guard - Any male person not less than seventeen nor more than sixty-five
years of age who accompanies a custodian by direction of the insured, but
who is not a driver of a public conveyance. 
10. Larceny - The terms “larceny” and “theft” are generally identical, and
therefore are used interchangeably. A theft involves the taking of the
personal possesions of another with a dishonest intent. Since “theft” and
“larceny” include both burglary and robbery, it is not necessary to define the
latter terms in policies covering theft or larceny. There are other terms found
in this general line of insurance, which essentially mean the same as above.
For example, one might find a policy covering “wrongful abstraction” or
“willful mis-application” of funds. It is sufficient to state that these terms are
essentially the same as those already mentioned. It is important to note,
however, that burglary, robbery and theft policies never cover losses caused
through the dishonesty of the insured or his employee. Coverage for
employee dishonesty is provided by Fidelity Insurance or Fidelity Bond.
Types of Policies
Crime policies may be classified on the basis of the peril which they insured -
burglary, robbery or theft. They may also be classified as to the buyer -
individuals or commercial establishments. A third possible classification is
whether the contract provides a limited or broad type of coverage. Examples of
type of crime coverages are as follows:
1. Individual Coverages
a. Broad Form Personal Theft - covers mysterious disappearance
b. Limited form Personal Theft - does not cover mysterious disappearance.
2. Business Coverages
a. Mercantile Open Stock Burglary > covers not only the stocks
 of business enterprise but
b. Mercantile Open Stock Theft > also its fixtures, machinery
 & equipment & premises
c. Mercantile Safe Burglary - Covers money and securities in safe lost by
burglary.
d. Mercantile Robbery - Covers money and securities and other property lost
by robbery.
e. Paymaster robbery - Covers loss of payroll funds caused by Robbery
inside or outside the premises of the insured.
f. Money and Securities Broad Form - This is practically an all-risk cover for
money and securities inside or outside premises. 
Part 8: MISCELLANEOUS INSURANCE LINES:
LIABILITY INSURANCE
A. Liability Insurance.
It goes under diverse names as “General Liability Insurance”, Third Party Liability
Insurance” and “Liability other than Automobile”. It is basically designed to
cover the responsibility for payment which an insured may incur to other
members of the public because of bodily injury or property damage which they
have suffered. In order for the insured to be held responsible for bodily injury or
property damage to others, he must have incurred such liability as a matter of
law or have voluntarily agreed to it as a matter of contract (Contractual Liability).
Liability insurance is often referred to as “Third Party Insurance” since there are
always three parties involved – the Insurance company, the policyholder and the
injured third party. This situation is in contrast to that in most insurance
coverages in which there are only two parties – the insurer and the insured.
B. Major Types of Liability Insurance available in the market
1. Business Liability Coverages
a. Owners’ landlords’ and tenants’
b. Manufacturers’ and contractors’
c. Elevator Liability
d. Products Liability
e. Owners’ or Contractors’ Protective Liability
f. Contractual Liability
2. Professional Liability Coverages
a. Physicians’, Surgeons’ and Dentists’ Malpractice
b. Druggist Liability
c. Hospital Liability
3. Personal Liability Coverages
a. Residence Liability
b. Sports Liability
c. Dog Liability
4. Comprehensive Liability Policies
a. Comprehensive General Liability
b. Comprehensive Personal Liability 
C. The Liability Hazard: Negligence. Any action which results in harm to
another person may be either a criminal act or civil act. A criminal act such as
murder or robbery, is a crime against society and is punished by the state. A civil
wrong is a wrong against a specific person and constitutes an invasion of the
rights of this third party. Civil wrongs are divided into two types: torts and
breach of contract.
Liability Insurance Policies. Are primarily concerned with paying for damages
caused by the negligence of the insured. Negligence is a tort. The usual legal
remedy in case involving civil wrongs is a suit for monetary damages. Liability
insurance covers those sums which may be awarded to an injured party due to
negligence on the part of the insured.
Negligence. May be defined as "a failure to exercise due care". There are
numerous unavoidable accidents for which it is unfair to hold anyone legally
responsible. The right of recovery for damages due to negligence arises from the
fact that society expects every person to conduct himself in such a way as not to
injure other members of society. As a matter of self-protection, society requires
that every person take into account the result of his actions on other persons. If
a person fails to exercise such due care and bodily injury or property damage
results, the injured party may have a right to reimbursement.
D. Liability vs Accident Insurance. A careful distinction must be made between
liability insurance and accident insurance. Both kinds of contracts may pay a
person who has been injured. However. many people have the mistaken belief
that if someone is injured, and insurance is carried, the injured party is entitled
to compensation. This is not the case, since the liability contract pays only if the
insured is legally obligated to pay the injured party. The fact that the insured,
under a liability contract, may feel partly responsible for payment of the injured
party's medical expenses, for example, is entirely irrelevant. The burden of proof
generally rests on the injured party to prove that the person who injured him
was negligent. Theoretically, no insurance company issuing a liability policy need
pay until such time as a decision is rendered by a competent court. Practically
speaking, of course, most companies find it preferable to settle cases out of
court if they feel that the facts of the case are such that the court would
eventually hold the insured liable.
E. On-Premises vs Off-Premises Coverage. Certain contracts are written to
cover liability arising from activities on the premises, others to cover liability
incurred off-premises, and some cover both situations. The Owner's, Landlord's
and Tenant's policy, for example, is primarily designed to cover liability arising
out of accidents in and around the place of business.
The Completed Operations section of the Products Liability policy is designed to
cover off the premises of the insured. The Comprehensive Personal Liability
policy covers occurrences both on the and off the premises of the insured. 
F. Direct vs Contingent Liability Contracts. The majority of liability contracts
cover the direct liability imposed by law which the insured may incur to others.
So called contingent or protective liability policies cover the liability of the insured
which is due to liability incurred by other person. For example, a general
contractor may be responsible for an accident of his sub-contractor, and this may
be covered under a contingent liability policy.
G. General Make-up of Public Liability Policies.
1. Face of the Policy - contains such routine information as name and address
of insured, policy period, occupation of the insured and certain declaration
made by the insured concerning details of his operations.
2. Insuring Agreement - the heart of the liability contract composed of the
insuring agreements which, generally speaking, are as follows:
a. Coverage A - Bodily Injury Liability - To indemnify the Insured for loss by
reason of the liability imposed by law upon the Insured, or assumed by
him under contract as defined herein, for damages, including damages
for care and loss of services, because of bodily injury, including death at
any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons caused
by accident.
Coverage B - Property Damage Liability - To indemnify the Insured for
loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon the Insured or
assumed by him under contract as defined herein, for damages because
of injury to or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof
caused by accident.
b. Defense, Settlement, Supplementary Payments - To indemnify the
Insured for all legal expense (including taxed court costs and interest on
that part of any verdict, judgment or award covered under this policy)
incurred with the consent of the company in connection with any suit,
even if groundless, brought against the Insured on account of this policy,
including the premiums on appeal bonds and release of attachment
bonds filed by the Insured in such suits.
3. General Exclusion in Liability Contracts - the following are the major
exclusions generally found in liability contracts:
a. Liability arising from the ownership or operation of aircraft.
b. Liability arising from the ownership or operation of automobile, boats or
other watercraft.
c. Any sickness or injury incurred by employees.
d. The war risk.
e. Damage to property in the care, custody or control of the Insured. 
f. Injury by products manufactured or sold by the insured or work which
has been completed by the Insured of which the accident arises, unless
specifically assumed.
g. Liability due to work of independent contractors or as a result of
structural alterations, unless specifically assumed.
h. Contractual liability, unless specifically assumed.
i. Elevator liability, unless specifically assumed.
j. Intentional injury or damage.
4. Conditions - Cover such diverse matters as claims procedure, proofs of loss,
cancellation, other insurance, changes and the like.
H. Limits of Liability. Liability Policies often contain separate limits for Bodily
Injury and for Property Damage. In addition, there is usually a separate perperson
limit and per-accident limit for the Bodily Injury portion. The per-person
limit is the maximum the company will pay to any one person. The per-accident
limit is the maximum the company will pay for any given accident regardless of
the number of persons who may be involved. With respect to property damage
liability, there is a single limit applying to any accident. Some policies contain an
aggregate policy limit for both Bodily Injury and Property Damage, which is the
maximum amount the company will pay during any given policy year.
I. Comprehensive General Liability. This is the broadest form of public liability
coverage normally made available. This policy has five sub-divisions:
1. Premises/Operations Liability - This is the basic and most important section
of the CGL contract. It provides coverages for claims arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the insured's premises and any and all
operations performed by the Insured.
2. Elevator Liability - This coverage pays for liability arising form the ownership,
maintenance, or use of elevators. Coverage applies while members of the
public are in the elevator, or leaving or entering it. Strangely enough, it is
possible to endorse this section of the policy to include "collision" insurance
under which the company agrees to pay "direct and accidental loss of or
damage to elevators and other property caused by collision of elevator or
anything carried thereon with another object".
3. Independent Contracts - also known as Owner's or Contractor's Protective
Liability, this type of cover represents a change from the general pattern of
liability contracts. It is not a direct coverage for the acts of the insured, but a
contingent coverage for the acts of others. It is sometimes referred to as a
"defense coverage" since it is often purchased because of the promise of the
insurance company to defend the insured in court against all lawsuits. The
purpose of this section is to cover the insured against liability which has been
incurred by others, but for which the insured may be secondarily liable. 
4. Products Liability Completed Operations Coverage - In essence this coverage
is designed to pay for accidents which result from mistakes in the
manufacture or preparation of products or the rendering of service work. The
coverage provides that the accident must occur -
• away from the insured's premises
• after the insured has relinquished the products to others.
The Products Liability coverage applies to those who manufacture or market
products to be sold to others. The completed operations section is applicable
primarily to firms engaged in the servicing, installation and repair work. It
should be particularly noted that under the property damage section, there is
an exclusion for damage to the product or premises out of which the accident
arises. Thus, if a can of hair spray explodes, injuring the user and breaking
the mirror in front of which he is sitting, the company would pay for the
injury of the user and the replacement of the broken mirror, but not to the
replacement of the can of hair spray.
5. Contractual liability - It has been previously noted that most liability policies
cover only the "liability imposed by law''. Contractual liability insurance is
written to cover a different hazard, namely, liability which the insured has
voluntarily assumed under a contract with a Third party. The CGL policy
automatically covers the following contractual assumptions of liability:
a. a lease of premises
b. a sidetrack agreement
c. elevator or escalator maintenance agreement
d. an easement required by municipal ordinance in connection with the work
for the municipality.
In addition, other types of agreements may be covered by this section if the
company is willing to insure them. Other types of agreements must be specially
submitted to the company for individual examination and rating. This must be
specifically included by endorsement under this policy.
Part 9 ENGINEERING INSURANCE
I. Engineering Insurance: Its Scope
Engineering Insurance refers collectively to such specialty insurance lines which
seemingly are too technical for an insurance layman to handle and which
comprise the following insurance product lines: Contractors’ All-Risks Insurance,
Erection All-Risks Insurance, Machinery Breakdown Insurance, Loss of Profits
following Machinery Breakdown Insurance, Deterioration of Stocks Insurance,
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance & Electronic Equipment Insurance. 
II. Coverage Features
A. Contractors’ All Risks (CAR) Insurance – Covers “All Risks” arising out of the
construction of buildings or structures. It is a property insurance by which
any building or civil engineering project is protected against accidents
resulting in physical damage to or the destruction of works in progress,
construction plant and equipment and/or construction machinery on the site.
Furthermore, the third party liability arising out of the construction can be
additionally covered.
a. Necessity for CAR Insurance
The work of the contractor is not – as in the case of industrial production
– performed in the factory or workshop where, to a large extent,
precautions for preventing damage can be taken. As a rule, the
contractor works on a building site exposed to unknown and unforseeable
dangers, such as subsidence, ground water, flood and inundation, as well
as to unfavorable weather conditions which may cause damage.
Moreover, he has to contend with the potential liability claims, that may
be caused to Third parties. Owing to keen competition, contracting firms
are often not in a position to include in their prices a sufficient margin for
the risks involved, if they wish their tender to be successful. This is
especially true in view of the fact that they may also be answerable for
losses and damage sustained by the contract works until these are taken
over by the project owners. Directly connected with this risk is the
additional liability carried out for the purpose of complying with his
obligations under the maintenance clause of the building contract.
For good reasons, project owners, consulting engineers, architects and
financiers have made the acceptance of tender dependent on a CAR
insurance being effected.
b. Subject-matter Insured
aa. Primarily covers the “work” to be carried out under the contract and
includes all materials stored on the site but not yet incorporated in
the structure. “Work” means the execution of all permanent contract
works by the contractors, including preparatory work on the site,
grading, levelling, excavation and other earth work, as well as the
execution of temporary works provided for in the plans and
separately paid for by the project owners or principal.
The value of material supplied by the principal must be added to the
sum insured, since it constitutes property held in trust or custody.
CAR can generally be taken out for all building and civil engineering
projects, such as:
Dwelling houses, office buildings, warehouse, hospitals, schools,
factories, silos, water towers, bridges, dams, canals, tunnels,
irrigation & water supply systems, drainage & sewer systems, 
roads, railway, runways, construction work in connection with
power stations, ports, airports, etc.
bb. Construction plant and equipment which is used on the site at the
discretion of the contractor, such as:
Sheds, stores, tracks, temporary accommodation and other
temporary buildings, scaffoldings, form work, power supply &
distributing plant, water supply installation, auxiliary bridges,
piers, etc.
The construction machinery used for the execution of the contract
works, such as excavators, bulldozers, rollers, pile drivers, vibrators,
concrete mixers, cranes, hoists, drilling machines, air compressors,
pumps, dumpers, trucks not licensed for use on public roads etc may
also be included for insurance, whether or not this machinery is the
property of the contractor or is on hire.
cc. If the installation and/or erection of machinery and/or steel structure
is included under the building contract, such can be insured also
under CAR provided the value of installation and erection works
(which normally should be covered under Erection All Risks) is less
than 50% of the total sum insured.
dd. CAR may also include Third Party Liability for fatal or non-fatal injury
and property damage arising from the construction up to the agreed
limit. Persons who are employed by the Insured on the site are not
however, considered as third party, but can be covered under
separate personal accident insurance or Workmen’s Compensation
insurance.
c. Insured Perils: CAR covers the following:
1. Loss or damage caused by:
a. “Acts of God”
aa. storm, tempest, hurricane, cyclone, typhoon, tidal wave
bb. flood, inundation
cc. landslide, rockslide, subsidence, earthquake
dd. lightning
2. Loss or damage consequent upon:
a. The use of faulty or unsuitable material
b. Bad Workmanship
c. Faulty design for which either the principal or the contractor or an
independent architect or consulting engineers is responsible. 
However the costs of rectifying defects in material, design or
workmanships, that is, the costs of replacing parts found to be
defective are not covered by the insurance.
3. Loss of or damage to material, construction plant, equipment and/or
machinery occurring during unloading and/or loading, including
intermediate storage on the site. The same applies to construction
plant, equipment and machinery whilst being erected and/or
dismantled.
4. Loss or damage caused by burglary, theft or sabotage.
d. Excluded Perils
1. War or warlike operations, invasion, civil war, strike, riot, rebellion,
civil commotion, confiscation or destruction by order of authorities.
2. Nuclear reaction, nuclear radiation or radioactive contamination.
3. Mechanical and/or electrical breakdown of construction machinery,
plant and equipment, normal atmospheric influence, corrosion,
oxidation or wear and tear (loss or damage consequent thereon is
however covered by CAR insurance).
4. Acts or orders made by the Insured or by his authorized
representatives, if such acts or orders are contrary to recognized rules
of engineering or to any legal regulation or provision.
5. Loss of or damage to files, bills, notes, cash, securities.
6. Loss of property discovered during the making of an inventory.
7. Penalties under contracts, fines, losses incurred as a result of delays
in the completion of contract works or cancellation of the contract.
8. Loss or damage due to partial or total cessation or work.
9. Loss or damage to motor vehicles licensed for general use on public
highways, watercraft and aircraft.
10. Third party liability claims under motor vehicle TPL.
e. Policy Period – Maintenance Period
CAR Insurance unlike other insurance, is not an annual insurance. The
cover provided attaches from the commencement of the work at the site
and remains in force until the contract works are completed and taken
over by the principal or put into service by the latter. It is advisable for
the Insured to take out fire insurance for any sections of the contract
completed and turned over to the principal.
Since the building site is the insured locations, the construction plant,
equipment and machinery is covered from the time of arriving at the site
until leaving it. 
Upon request, the CAR policy may be extended to cover the subsequent
maintenance period which usually lasts from 3 to 12 months. The cover
during this period is however restricted and is exclusively in respect of
loss or damage arising out of the performance of guarantee work. This
usually consists of works not in accordance with the contract or are in
any way defective.
f. Sum Insured
The sum insured must be equal to the sum of the following:
aa. Contract value – amount laid down in the contract
bb. Additional work performed by day labor and other supplementary
work
cc. Value of building materials and structural parts supplied by principal
dd. The value of the construction plant, equipment and machinery
increases the sum insured where such items are declared for
insurance. They must be insured at their replacement value.
B. Erection All Risks (EAR) Insurance – Is an “All Risks” cover for the entire
duration of the erection, commencing when the machinery and plant
intended for installation is unloaded at the site and continuing during storage
on the site, during erection and the subsequent test period. EAR provides a
very comprehensive cover for machinery mechanical equipment, apparatus,
steel construction of any kind while in the process of installation in factories
and industrial plants such as oil refineries, sugar mills, cement plants, paper
mills, etc.
a. Necessity for EAR Insurance
The progress of industrialization, entailing the erection of machinery and
plant of increased size and value has rendered it impossible for firms
engaged in erection to carry the high liabilities involved for their own
account.

b. Subject-matter Insured
aa. Machinery, mechanical equipment, apparatus, steel construction of
any kind on the site where they are subsequently to be used,
including the necessary construction work provided the nature of the
project is predominantly that of an erection;
bb. Pipelines and overhead transmission lines, including all the work
necessary for laying or erecting them;
cc. Second-hand machinery which is in good working order, provided
that the insurance terminates upon the commencement of the 
testing period which is not insurable, in the case of second-hand
machinery. Subject further to the exclusion of loss or damage which
can be proved to have arisen from the previous operation of the
machinery.
dd. Machinery & equipment required to carry out the erection (e.g.
compressors, cranes, mast). Experience has shown that such
machinery & equipment is prone to loss since usually it is used
(second-hand) which is not regularly serviced. In addition it is
exposed to the elements and this must be taken into account in
rating. A condition precedent to insuring erection machinery and
equipment is that the object to be installed or erected is also insured.
ee. Removal of debris, which is especially important where steel
constructions are concerned.
ff. Additional costs incurred for overtime work, work on Sundays and
holidays, as well as express freight. Air freight, however, being
excluded in principle.
c. Insured Perils: EAR covers the following:
aa. Faults in erection
bb. Lack of skill, carelessness, negligence
cc. Malicious damage and sabotage
dd. Theft
ee. Accidents such as falling of objects, breakdown of erection
equipment, or damage to machinery caused by the collapse of
building or parts thereof.
ff. Fire, lightning, explosion
gg. Acts of God: storm, hurricane, tornado, typhoon, cyclone, flood,
inundation, subsidence, landslide, rockslide.
hh. Third party liability for the following damage and/or injuries may be
included:
i damage to property of third parties, including property held in
trust by or under the custody of the insured and for which he is
responsible
ii bodily injuries sustained by third parties excluding employees and
workers of the purchaser or of any contractors.
d. Exclusions
aa. War or warlike actions, strike, riot, civil commotion, nuclear energy.
bb. Deliberate acts or gross negligence on the part of the Insured
cc. Penalties under contract.
dd. Operational deficiencies
ee. Loss or damage arising from faulty design, defects in casting,
defective material, bad workmanship and workshop faults are not 
normally covered by EAR since such losses come under the
manufacturer’s liability and the purchaser has a warranty that such
defects will be made good. If, however, the manufacturer is also the
erector and the policy is made out in his name, the insurance can be
extended to cover such losses against payment of an additional
premium.
e. Period of Insurance
The insurance commences when the property to be insured is unloaded
at the erection site and continues until the machinery or plant is
completely installed or erected and tested. It automatically includes
therefore any storage prior to the commencement of the erection or
during erection and the test operation or test loading, the duration of
which is normally limited to four weeks.
f. Sum Insured
This is the contract price of the machinery or plant, including freight,
customs duties and erection costs. Amounts to be insured for removal of
debris, civil engineering works and third party liability should be fixed
separately.
g. Maintenance Period
If this insurance is provided during the period the suppliers are obliged to
supervise the new machinery or plant and initiate the purchasers
personnel into its operation, it should be noted that the cover includes
only loss or damage caused by errors on the part of the supervising
personnel in the course of training the purchaser’s staff. Any other loss
or damage should be covered under appropriate machinery breakdown,
fire, TPL, etc. policies.
C. Machinery Breakdown (MB) Insurance – Is an “Accident” Insurance on
machinery, mechanical equipment and apparatus, it covers any unforeseen
and sudden loss or damage due to external causes, including human error,
as well as loss or damage due to causes inherent in the machine itself.
a. Necessity for MB Insurance
Anything mechanical or subject to pressure can fail, sometimes with
frightening frequency. Statistics gathered by a large insurance company
show how many machinery objects and their parts will fail and suffer and
accident each year and the cost could pose financial hardships to plant
owners.
b. Examples of Objects Insured under MB Insurance
aa. Turbo generator sets
bb. Transformers
cc. Electric motors
dd. Steam engines, internal combustion engines
ee. Outside equipment such as pile driver, material handling plant,
crane. 
c. Insured Perils
aa. Faulty design bad workmanship, workshop or erection faults, faulty
casting and faulty material
bb. Lack of skill, carelessness, malicious damage
cc. Short-circuit
dd. Shortage or water in boilers
ee. Tearing apart on account of centrifugal force
ff. Physical explosion
gg. Any other damage occurring as a result of unforeseen events.
d. Exclusions
aa. Perils covered under any other types of insurance such as fire,
lightning, chemical explosion, burglary and theft.
bb. Wear and tear, cavitation, erosion, corrosion, rust and boiler-scale.
cc. War or warlike operations, civil commotion, strike, riot etc. nuclear
energy.
dd. Acts of God
ee. Willful or grossly negligent act on the part of the insured or his
employees
ff. Losses covered by warranty
e. Sum Insured
The sum insured should always be the replacement cost of the insured
machinery (replacement value plus customs duty, transportation and
installation charges), since it is necessary in the case of repairs to obtain
new parts to be installed in the damaged machinery.
D. Loss of Profits Following Machinery Breakdown Insurance
a. What it covers
This insurance provides cover for the actual loss of profits sustained as a
result of a business interruption caused by an accident indemnifiable
under machinery breakdown insurance. Basically, a loss due to an
interruption of business is made up of the following factors:
• The reduction in turnover resulting from decreased production
or other impairment of business operations caused by an
accident.
• The increase in cost of working, i.e., the additional
expenditure necessarily and reasonably incurred for avoiding
or diminishing the reduction in turn over.
b. Period of Insurance 
The policy is usually issued on an annual basis normally commencing and
ending at 12 midnight.
c. Sum Insured
The sum insured is made up of the gross profit obtained from the
turnover of goods produced or handled in the course of the Insured’s
business for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months.
d. Indemnity Period
Represents the maximum time for which the insurers is liable for loss of
profit, commences when loss of profits begins. Indemnity period is
usually fixed at 3, 6, 9 or 12 months.
E. Deterioration of Stocks Insurance
a. What it is?
It is an insurance against deterioration of goods placed in cold storage
due to a breakdown of refrigerating machinery.
It is a follow-up cover to machinery breakdown insurance and may only
be taken in connection with the latter.
b. What can be insured?
All goods suitable for storage in cold-storage houses may be covered
such as:
aa. Fruits, like apples, pears, berries, citrus fruit, bananas, etc.
bb. Vegetables like potatoes, onions, carrots, asparagus, cabbage.
cc. Fresh meat, fresh and smoke fish
dd. Dairy products, canned foods, pre-cooked dishes
ee. Beverages
ff. Vaccines, drugs and other substances for medical purposes
gg. Chemical and technical products
c. Period of Insurance
Usually issued on annual basis and ending at 12 midnight.
d. Sum Insured
This is based on the probable maximum sales price obtainable for the
goods during the policy period.
F. Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance
a. What it covers?
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance is an accident insurance for Boilers
and Pressure Vessels against the risk of explosion and collapse.
aa. EXPLOSION means the sudden and violent rending or tearing apart
of the permanent structure of a boiler or other apparatus by force
of internal steam or fluid pressure causing bodily displacement of 
the structure or any part thereof and accompanied by forcible
ejectment of its contents.
bb. COLLAPSE means the sudden and dangerous distortion of any part
of a boiler or other apparatus by bending or crushing caused by
steam or fluid pressure whether attended by rupture or not. A
slowly developing deformation due to any cause is not considered a
“Collapse”.
b. Subject Matter Insured:
aa. Damage to the Boiler or other apparatus described
bb. Damage to surrounding property owned by the Insured
cc. Liability on account of fatal or non-fatal injuries to or damage to the
property of Third Parties.
c. Causes of Explosion or Collapse, Covered under the Policy
aa. Hidden and undetected weaknesses and flaws in condition,
workmanship and materials
bb. The human element
cc. Overloading and failure of protective devices
d. Flue Gas Explosion
Sometimes referred to as a Furnace Explosion is the explosion caused by
the ignition of urburnt gases in the furnace or flues of the boiler. This is
an additional peril to the normal cover and requires an additional
premium.
G. Electronic Equipment Insurance (EEI)
a. What it is?
EEI is designed to provide appropriate cover for all types of electronic
equipment, computers, delicate electric and electro-mechanical
equipment such as radio broadcast, television and camera equipment,
medical, communication, office equipment, etc.
b. Insured Perils
aa. Explosion, fire and lightning
bb. Theft
cc. Short circuit, over voltage, failure of insulation, arcing,
electromagnetic phenomena and implosion
dd. Damage to expendable parts (bulbs, ribbons, belts, tapes, etc.
c. Sum Insured
The new replacement value of a new equivalent item, including packing,
freight, customs duties and cost of installation. 
Part 10 B O N D S
1. DEFINITION
A bond is an agreement among three parties whereby a Surety Company
guarantees the performance by individual (called the Principal) of an obligation
or undertaking in favor of a third party (called the obligee).
The Surety Company undertakes to indemnify the Obligee for whatever loss he
might suffer if the Principal fails to comply with his obligation. A bond is
secondary to the Principal or original contract.
2. PARTIES TO A BOND
a) Surety - is the bonding company
b) Principal - (or obligor) is the guaranteed or bonded party whose conduct
the Surety is held responsible.
c) Obligee - is the insured party in whose favor the bond is issued.
3. BOND TERMS AND CONDITIONS
The terms and conditions of a bond are usually drawn from the primary contract
between the Principal and Obligee or from the laws, rules, and regulations in
case of bonds in favor of the government or any of its instrumentalities. It is
therefore essential that a copy of the basic contract be submitted in order to fully
appreciate the extent of the obligations sought to be covered by the bond
applied for. In case of verbal agreements where the obligations of the Principal
is merely implied as in the case of employment contracts, it may be necessary to
specify in clear unmistakable terms the liability the Surety Company is willing to
assume under the bond. For those obligations imposed by the laws, rules and
regulations of the government and its instrumentalities, a familiarity or frequent
reference to the statutes concerned will be expected of a prudent underwriter.
4. THREE (3) “C’ S” OF SURETY UNDERWRITING
a) Character b) Capacity c) Capital 
5. COLLATERAL REQUIREMENTS
a) Signatures – of two (2) solvent guarantors known as Co-Signers who act
as sureties for the principal under a Counter-Guaranty Agreement.
b) Unencumbered Real Estate - a real estate must be:
aa. First Mortgage
bb. Located within the commercial district of a city
cc. Valued not less than twice the amount of the bond being applied
for.
c) Chattel Mortgages - mortgages on property other than real property.
d) Pledges of Shares of Stocks - as listed in the Stock Exchange.
The valuation of such stock is based on the current market values minus
a certain amount as allowance for fluctuations in the market.
e) Cash Deposit - may be with the company or in any bank.
f) Bank Guarantees - fixed deposits, letters of credit.
g) Government Bonds, Treasury Notes - or other obligations guaranteed as
to Principal and interest by the government.
6. THE INDEMNITY AGREEMENT
For every bond issued, an indemnity agreement is executed between the
Principal and Surety. An indemnity agreement is one which binds the Principal
among other things, to repay the Surety for whatever amount the latter has paid
the Obligee. It is the document by which the bonding company recovers from
the Principal the amount it paid to the Obligee.
The type of bond is not the determining factor in the use of indemnity
agreement IA. It may be said that the security offered to and accepted by the
Surety Company determines what form (short/long) of IA shall be used.
7. TYPES OF BONDS
a) Surety Bonds - is one wherein the bonding company (the Surety
premises to answer financially to the obligee for the debt, default or
conduct of the Principal. Under this kind of bond, the bonding company’s
liability is not limited to any one cause of loss but extends to all losses by
the principal’s actions, provided these losses are covered by the bond. 
aa. Contract Bonds - These are bonds required in connection with
contracts for construction, supply or labor. Under this general
classification are included the bidder’s bonds required prior to the
awarding of these contracts.
1. Bidder’s Bond
1.1 Single Bid - the contract to supply materials
equipment, etc. for certain construction work is
often placed on public bidding. The participants in
these biddings are required to post a bond which
guarantees that if the principal is successful in his
bid, he will enter into a contract with the obligee
and put up a performance bond to guarantee that
the contract awarded to him is faithfully complied
with. The alert bondsman should base his
underwriting judgement into this possibility since
the performance bond is usually for a much larger
amount than the bidder’s bond.
1.2 One Year Standing - the government and its
instrumentalities, regularly calls for bids for the
supply of its needs such as equipment, medical
supplies, drugs, foodstuffs, etc. To simplify
accounting, a single bond is accepted which will
cover all the biddings (for the same obligee) in
which the principal is likely to participate within one
year rather than post a bond each time. This calls
for the One Year Standing Bidder’s Bond which
provides essentially the same coverage as the
ordinary Bidder’s Bond but is applicable to every
bidding participated in by the principal over a
period of one year. The data and the security
required on the One-Year Standing Bond are
substantially the same as those for the regular
Bidder’s Bond.
2. Performance Bond
2.1 Private Construction - like the government,
private individuals and entities often require performance
bonds from contractors who enter into construction
contracts with them. The form and collateral requirement
for this bond are the same as those for government
construction. 
b) Fidelity Bonds - promises to reimburse an employer (Obligee) for any
loss of money or property that the latter might sustain due to the
dishonest act of an employee (the Principal) mentioned in the bond.
When it covers only one employee, it is known as the Individual Fidelity
Bond. When it covers either a number of selected employees or all the
employees of the obligee, it is called a Blanket Fidelity Bond.
aa. Individual Fidelity Bond - certain forms of employment which
entail the handling of money or property expose the employer to
a peculiar hazard. Positions such as those of a cashier, agent,
property custodian, collector, etc. present a great deal of
temptation to the employee and properly attributed to dishonest
acts of employees. To protect himself from such losses, the
employer often requires a bond from applicants for employment in
such positions of trust. This is the Individual Fidelity Bond which,
in effect, guarantees the personal honesty of the Principal. The
bond will indemnify the employer, arising out of dishonest acts of
an employee. By the terms of the bond, the Company’s liability
will attach if the court finds the act:
1. amount to “estafa” within the meaning of the penal code;
payment to be made only upon the presentation of the
final judgement of the court; and
2. was committed in the course of the position held by the
employee and during the term of the bond.
There are various forms of blanket fidelity bonds covering either selected
employees only of company or all of its employees, to secure the company
against losses through dishonest or fraudulent acts of said employees. Unlike
the individual fidelity bonds all the existing forms of blanket fidelity bonds do not
contain the condition precedent to recovery, of a prior conviction for “estafa”.
Furthermore, in the case of blanket fidelity bonds, only the employer and the
surety company are involved in the negotiations for the coverage since the
employees themselves may or may not be aware that they had been bonded by
their employer; hence this partakes of the nature of insurance more than of
suretyship. Lastly, premiums for the blanket fidelity bonds are based on the
probability of loss just like in insurance contracts.
8. DISTINCTION BETWEEN BOND AND INSURANCE
The essential differences between Suretyship and the other non-life insurance
lines are: 
a) as to the nature of the contract - Insurance is basically a primary
contract while a bonding contract is secondary in nature since it is based
on some other contract or undertaking.
b) As to the contracts involved - in insurance, there is only one major
contract, the insurance policy. A suretyship consists of three contractsthe
primary contract, the bond and the Counter Guarantee Agreement.
c) As to the parties involved - there are only two (2) parties involved in an
insurance Contract-the Insured and the Insurer. However, in a bond,
there re three parties involved-the Surety, the Principal and the Obligee.
d) As to the protection - an insurance protects the buyer or the insured
while a bond protects a third party or the obligee.
e) As to the cancellation - insurance contracts are subject to cancellation
by both the insured and the insurer, whereas Surety bonds generally can
be cancelled only by the obligee, regardless of the wishes of the Principal
or the Surety.
f) As to the premium - in an insurance contract, the company takes all the
risk, and premium is computed on the probability of loss based on the
accrued or expected experience. The premium is the whole consideration
for the insurance contract. However, the premium paid in a bond is only
a service fee for the extension of credit because surety contracts are
simply credit instruments.
g) As to claim - since insurance is based upon the sharing by many of the
losses of the relatively few, the claim in an insurance contract is a loss.
In suretyship, however, no losses are expected. The claim paid in
suretyship is only a loan. Losses, of course do occur, but in such event,
the surety usually has the right to subrogation, or salvage, in its effort to
recoup its losses from the defaulting principal, since the principal is
primarily liable.
9. UNDERWRITING OF BONDS
The underwriting of bonds follows almost the same procedures as in other lines
of insurance. Of course, the experience of the underwriter plays a very
important part in the right approach to proper evaluation of underwriting
information and other pertinent data which are essential to the underwriter in
forming a basis for his decision. But before one could begin to underwrite
bonds, he would first be well versed with bonding practices. First of all, he must,
for instance, always be aware of the cardinal rule that the surety is not supposed
to incur any loss since bonding in reality is a lending or extending of credit or
accommodation. 
The underwriter has to go thru the following procedure before he arrives at a
decision as to whether a bond should be written or not, to wit: Underwriting
Information - the underwriter follows a set of rules in this respect. He should
require of the bond applicant that the following papers be filled up and
submitted:
a) Bond Application Form
b) Copy of the contract to be guaranteed by the bond (primary contract)
c) Co-Signer’s Statements to be filled up by the proposed Co-Signers
d) Documents evidencing principal’s legal existence if applicant is an entity
other than a natural person.
e) Principal’s Audited Financial Statement for the past three years by
reputable accounting firm
f) Such other information which to the underwriter’s mind are material to
his assessment of the risk. 
INSURANCE CLAIMS
1. PROPER CLAIM ATTITUTE
It is important for both the Insureds and the Insurance Companies to have
proper claim attitude because such proper claim attitude is the key to settle
claims expeditiously.
Insureds must realize that insurance is a social device to indemnify those who
suffer losses. It is not a device for them to make profits. Thus, they should not
claim where there is no loss. Neither should they claim for more than what they
actually have lost. Such, among a number of others, are not proper claim
attitude.
Insurance companies should also consider insurance as a social device primarily
for the purpose of offering protection to the insuring public against various types
of perils. That in the event someone should suffer losses as a result of the
occurrence of such perils, he would be compensated. Making profit out of
insurance operations should be considered secondary or incidental. Thus,
insurers should always strive to compensate legitimate claimants as quickly as
possible. Valid claims should be settled at the earliest possible time. Such,
among a number of others, may be considered as the proper claim attitude of
Insurance companies.
2. ADJUSTER
A) What is an Adjuster?
An adjuster is an individual person, a partnership, an association or
corporation which for a fee or anything of value, acts for or represents an
insurance company or an Insured in the settlement of insurance claims
and is duly licensed by the proper government agency.
B) Kinds of Adjusters
Adjusters may be classified into 3 kinds, namely:
a) Independent Adjusters - these are adjusters who may be
defined as above, except that they represent or act for and in
behalf of insurance companies. 
b) Public Adjusters - these are also adjusters as defined above,
except that they act for or represent only the Insureds.
c) Company or In-House Adjusters - these are salaried
employees of an insurance company who are usually assigned to
handle simpler adjustments and are not required to be licensed by
government agency.
C) Functions of Adjusters
Once the functions of adjusters are enumerated, it could be realized
immediately why they are needed.
a) Handling Claims - the primary function of adjusters, of course,
would be to handle insurance claims either for the insured or the
insurance company in order to expedite claim settlement.
b) Relieve Claim Burden - Adjusters relieve claim burden of
insurance executives, so that they do not have to handle claims
themselves and may thus attend to their other work.
c) Reports Serve as Evidence of Loss - Adjuster’s reports on
loss cases assigned to them serve as evidence of loss as between
the insurance companies and their reinsurers.
d) Minimize Fraudulent Claims - it is unavoidable that insurance
companies will come across fraudulent claims from time to time.
Good adjusters would be able to either eliminate or minimize such
fraudulent claims.
e) Serve as Buffer Element - Adjusters normally will serve as a
buffer element between an Insured and an insurance company.
Tempers very often rise between them. Adjusters serve as
cushions.
f) Protects Legitimate Rights - in so far as public adjusters are
concerned, they protect the legitimate rights of the Insureds.
3. AGENTS’ DUTIES IN CLAIM ADJUSTMENT
In case of claim it would be an agents’ duty to assist the Insured in filing his
notice and other documents and to see to it that his rights are protected. 
The agent should see to it that claims are settled expeditiously without
unnecessary delay and the Insured is indemnified properly.
It is also the duty of an agent to protect his company from fraudulent claims and
to see to it that his company will not be compelled to pay more than what it is
liable.
In other words, an agent should exercise utmost efforts in effecting a fair
settlement of any claim.
4. ARBITRATION & ADJUDICATIONS
A) Arbitration - is a process provided under an insurance policy by which
an insured and an insurance company are required to settle amicably
claim disputes on amount of loss without litigation.
B) Adjudication - is an authority granted to the Government insurance
agency to hear or adjudicate insurance claims or complaints provided
such cases do not exceed certain limits in any one single claim.
C) Relationship between Arbitration and Adjudication.
a. Arbitration is a contractual provision while adjudication is a legal
provision.
b. Adjudication has broader scope as it encompasses disputes on
liability.
c. Once adjudication is invoked, arbitration becomes academic.
d. If the law does not so provide, adjudication may be invoked
without passing through arbitration.
e. Even after an award is rendered in arbitration, adjudication, may
still be invoked.
5. EX-GRATIA PAYMENT
A) What is “Ex-Gratia Payment”
An ex-gratia payment is a payment made by an insurance company for
loss which it is not legally liable or has no legal liability to pay. 
B) Reasons for Ex-Gratia Payments
Ex-gratia payments are made primarily for 2 reasons:
a. To earn goodwill
b. To obtain additional volume of business
6. GENERAL CLAIM PROCEDURES
Different lines of insurance have different claim procedures to follow. However,
there are certain features or steps that are common to all. These are then
known as the General Claims Procedures. These are the claim procedures that
are common to all kinds of insurance.
A) Notice of Loss
In any kind of insurance, whenever there is a loss, notice of such loss
must be given to the Insurer in the manner provided under the policy
concerned. Unless the policy provided otherwise notice may be given
either orally or in writing and such notice must be given without
unnecessary delay. An insurance company cannot be held liable unless
notice is given.
B) Investigation of Loss
Upon receipt of a notice of claim, an insurance company will either assign
the same to an independent adjuster or its own company adjuster for
investigation in order to determine the validity or compensability of such
claim.
Investigation would involve on-site inspection, interviewing witnesses,
gathering pertinent documents and studying the policy as to the
coverage, exclusions and conditions and violations if any. All of these are
for the determination of the validity of the claim filed.
C) Adjustment or Denial of Loss
If after investigation, the adjuster believes that the claim is not valid or
not compensable, he will then recommend to the assigning company for
denial, if the claim is found to be valid and compensable, then negotiation
or adjustment will be initiated immediately.
Adjustment work would involve the determination of the extent of loss or
damage, valuation of property insured, measure of interest and the
application of average clause if applicable. All of these will finally
determine the amount payable. 
D) Settlement of Loss
When the liability of an insurance company is established and admitted
and the amount of loss payable is also determined, all that remain to be
done is to pay.
Normally, this is a simple procedure, unless complications arise which
could involve problems of:
a. Mortgagee
b. Mutual Accounts
c. Garnishments
d. Beneficiaries
 
 1

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

NON-LIFE INSURANCE




2

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

3

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Table of contents 

1.

 

Introduction

.............................................................................................................

4

2.

 

Analysis of business results in the non-life insurance lines

.......................................

7

A.

 

Profitability

...............................................................................................................

7

B.

 

Concentration in the line

..........................................................................................

8

C.

 

Seasonality

...............................................................................................................

11

3.

 

The reform in the compulsory motor-vehicle insurance line

.................................

13

A.

 

General

....................................................................................................................

13

B.

 

Rates starting from April 2001

................................................................................

13

C.

 

Correct declarations given by insured

......................................................................

14

D.

 

Claim report

............................................................................................................

15

E.

 

Database

..................................................................................................................

16

F.

 

Residual insurance

...................................................................................................

16

G.

 

Avner

.......................................................................................................................

17

4.

 

Rates in property motor-vehicle insurance

.............................................................

18

A.

 

Cancellation of minimum premium

........................................................................

18

B.

 

Review of the rate formulas

.....................................................................................

18

5.

 

The terrorist attack of September 11

th

 and its implications

...................................

21

6.

 

Cancellation of venue stipulation in insurance contracts

.......................................

22

7.

 

Health insurance

....................................................................................................

23

A.

 

Introduction

............................................................................................................

23

B.

 

Business results in the sickness and hospitalization line

............................................

23

C.

 

Long-term care insurance

........................................................................................

24

1) Background

..........................................................................................................

24

2) Guidance on long-term care insurance (individual)

..............................................

25

D.

 

Health insurance for foreign workers

.......................................................................

26

E.

 

Proper disclosure in group health insurance

.............................................................

28

F.

 

Prohibition of selling policies for supplementary medical covers to traffic

accident casualties

....................................................................................................

28

List of tables:

Table D-1:

 

Distribution of Non-Life Insurance Gross Premiums, by Lines, 

in the years 1998-2001

................................................................................

6

List of figures:

Figure D-1:

 

Distribution of gross non-life insurance premiums by lines in 2001

............

5

Figure D-2:

 

ProfitabilityoftheNon-LifeInsuranceLineintheyears1996-2001

...........

7

Figure D-3:

 

ProfitsinNon-LifeInsurancebyMainLinesin1998-2001

........................

8




2

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

3

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-4:

 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Non-Life Insurance 

Lines in 2001 (excluding Avner and Karnit)

................................................

9

Figure D-5:

 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Motor-Vehicle 

Insurance Line in 2001

...............................................................................

9

Figure D-6:

 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Homeowners 

Insurance Line in 2001

.............................................................................

10

Figure D-7:

 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Property Loss 

Insurance Line in 2001

.............................................................................

10

Figure D-8:

 

Distribution of Insurance Premiums in the Main Lines, by Quarters 

in 2001

.....................................................................................................

11

Figure D-9:

 

Business Results in the Sickness and Hospitalization Line in 2000-2001

...

23

Figure D-10:

 

Distribution of Gross Insurance Premiums by Companies in the Sickness 

and Hospitalization Line in 2001

..............................................................

24

Appendices

Appendix A:

 

Parameters used by the insurance companies to set the compulsory 

motor-vehicle insurance premiums as of 31.12.01

.....................................

31

Appendix B:

 

Companies that have not used the parameters for pricing a private car

......

31

 




4

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

5

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

1. 

Introduction 

The Non-life insurance Department is responsible for setting the policy, regulation and 

current supervision on all the insurance lines, except for life insurance. The purpose of the 

department is to protect the interests of the insured and put an emphasis on creating a market 

with proper structure based on fair competition. The insurance lines include, among other 

things, property insurance, comprehensive and compulsory motor-vehicle insurance, liability 

insurances, financialinsurancesandhealthinsurances.Thehealthinsurancesincludelong-

term care insurance, insurance for covering medical expenses, implants, individual accidents 

etc. 

During 2001 the Division dealt with the implementation of the firststageofreforminthe

compulsory motor-vehicle insurance line. At the beginning of April the insurance rates were 

updated so as to reflecttheinsuranceriskembodiedinthevariousvehicles,andthestandard

rate of insurance that was in use for many years, was cancelled, by opening a range of ten 

percent above and below a benchmark rate. In this range, the insurance companies can set 

different insurance rates for different insured. 

Regarding property motor-vehicle insurances, the Insurance Commissioner has issued 

a circular guiding the insurance companies to cancel the minimum premium they have 

integrated in the standard rate and resubmit the rate formulas for approval. 

Toward the end of the year the influenceoftheeventsofSeptember11

th

wasevidentand

consequently the rates in insurance lines that cover catastrophes rose. 

Regarding health insurances, rules were set for extending the proper disclosure toward the 

insured at the time of joining the insurance and during the insurance period. Moreover, new 

insurance policies for foreign workers have been approved according to the instructions set 

in the Foreign Workers order that came into force on October 2001. This order instructs 

employers to insure the foreign workers employed by them at a minimum scope of cover, 

which is basically similar to the health basket given to Israeli citizens according to the National 

Health Insurance law. In addition, during this year the Insurance Commissioner published 

a draft of instructions for the insurance companies regarding the long-term care insurance in 

individual policies in order to assure a fair long-term cover and maintain the stability of the 

insurance business.

The total of premiums

1

 in the non-life insurance lines in 2001 was about NIS 14.9 billion. 

This amount is an increase of about 8.7% (about NIS 1.2 billion) compared with the year 

2000 where about NIS 13.7 billions were collected. This is an exceptional increase in the 

premiums (between 1988-2000 there was an average decline of about 0.3% a year in the 

collected premiums). 




4

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

5

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-1: 

Distribution of gross non-life insurance premiums by lines in 2001

(Percent)

Source

: annual report data of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital Market, 

Insurance and Savings Division (Based on individual Companies’ reports (Solo)).

According to table D-1, this increase is the result of an increase of about NIS 304 million in 

premiums in the business property loss and comprehensive line (about 27.4%), an increase 

of about NIS 299 million in the property motor-vehicle line (about 6.7%) and an increase of 

about NIS 185 million in the sickness and hospitalization line (about 18.2%). 

 

property loss & homeowners

9%

homeowners

7%

compulsory motor-vehicle

26%

property motor-vehicle

31.8%

employer liability

1.9%

other liability lines

7%

Individual accidents

1.4%

sickness & hospitalization

8.1%

aircraft and marine vessels

0.2%

cargo in transit

0.7%

engineering 

insurance

2.1%

credit 

insurance

0.8%

other risks

3.7%




6

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

7

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Table D-1:

Distribution of Non-Life Insurance Gross Premiums, by Lines, 

in the years 1998-2001

(NIS thousands, December 31 2001 prices)

Insurance type

1998

1999

2000

2001

Change in 

premiums 

between 

2000-2001

Rate of 

premium 

change in 

2000-2001

Business property loss and 

comprehensive 

1,231,438

1,115,887

1,108,390

1,412,107

303,717

27.4

Homeowners

985,275

967,226

1,006,453

1,044,091

37,637

3.7

Compulsory motor-vehicle 

3,823,991

3,749,955

3,812,232

3,874,569

62,337

1.6

Property motor-vehicle 

4,744,693

4,607,550

4,441,974

4,740,615

298,640

6.7

Employer liability 

261,838

258,033

248,901

278,478

29,576

11.9

Other liability lines 

854,667

909,745

906,671

1,040,472

133,801

14.8

Individual accidents 

224,998

218,662

205,561

205,494

-67

0.0

Sickness and 

hospitalization 

802,350

948,638

1,019,284

1,204,392

185,108

18.2

Aircraft and marine vessels 

27,476

27,418

26,581

30,283

3,702

13.9

Cargo in transit 

135,390

119,053

112,328

110,495

-1,833

-1.6

Engineering insurance 

254,183

305,531

288,586

316,248

27,662

9.6

Credit insurance 

99,734

106,249

69,840

119,508

49,668

71.1

Other risks 

361,240

436,211

483,627

547,698

64,070

13.2

Businesses originating 

abroad 

1,206

1,053

587

1,141

554

94.3

Total 

13,808,478

13,771,210

13,731,015

14,925,589

1,194,574

8.7

Source:

 annual report data of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital Market, 

Insurance and Savings Division (Based on individual Companies’ reports (Solo)).




Line profits

(including Avner)

Avner profits

1,000

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

1996

 

1997

 

1998

 

1999

 

2000

 

2001

6

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

7

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

2. Analysis of business results in the non-life 

insurance lines 

A.

 

Profitability

The profitinallthenon-lifeinsurancelinesaggregatedin2001someNIS812million

compared with NIS 430 million in 2000. This is an increase of about 89% in profitability.

As seen in figureD-2,theprofitabilityinthenon-lifeinsurancelinesisfluctuational.

Figure D-2: ProfitabilityoftheNon-LifeInsuranceLineintheyears1996-2001

(NIS million)

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division (Based on individual Companies’ reports (Solo)).

 

Figure D-3

1

 shows a profitinthemaininsurancelinesin1998-2001.Itisevidentthatthe

compulsory motor-vehicle insurance line (including Avner) is the most profitablelineinall

the reviewed years

2

. In addition, one can see the fluctuationalnaturethatcharacterizesthe

property motor-vehicle insurance line (see detailing in the Commissioners’ report for 2000). 

In 2001 the profitabilityinthesetwolineswasabout66%oftheprofitabilityinthenon-life

insurance line (about 43% in 2000). 

The profitabilityinthehomeownerslineisrelativelystable,andrangingbetweenaboutNIS

88 million and about NIS 103 million a year. In 2001 it was about 11% of the total profit

in the line whereas the rate of premium in the homeowners line was about 7% of the total of 

premiums in the non-life insurance line. 

1

  

 

The profit of the compulsory insurance line includes Avner’s profits as follows: in 1998 — NIS 

571 million, in 1999 — NIS 408 million, in 2000 — NIS 85 million and in 2001 — NIS 157 

million. 




compulsory

motor-vehicle

property

motor-vehicle

homeowners

sickness & 

hospitalization

 

property loss

other liabilities 

(employer and other)

1998

 

1999

 

2000

 

2001

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

(100)

(200)

(300)

8

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

9

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-3: ProfitsinNon-LifeInsurancebyMainLinesin1998-2001

(NIS million)

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division (Based on individual Companies’ reports (Solo)).

B.

 

Concentration in the line 

The insurance premiums collected by the Clal group (the group with the largest market 

share) in the non-life insurance lines in 2001 are about 2.5% of the total insurance premiums 

collected in the line. The part of the Clal group is about 1/3 of the total of insurance 

premiums collected in the property loss and homeowners lines (about 36.3% and 31.5% 

correspondingly) and about 1/4 of the total of insurance premiums collected in the property 

motor-vehicle insurance line (about 23.1%). 

According to the figuresbelow,itappearsthatthefourlargeinsurancegroups

3

havea

considerable market share in the property insurance lines. Their share in the property loss 

line is about 79.6%, their share in the homeowners line is about 72.6% and in the property 

motor-vehicle insurance line about 62.9%. The differences in concentration in the various 

insurance lines may indicate the degree of competition in the various lines. 

2

 

 

Figures D-2 and D-3 include the profitability of the Avner Company. This company recognizes 

a profit after five years, unlike most of the insurance companies that recognize a profit after three 

years. If Avner’s reporting method in 2001 were like other companies, the profit would have 

increased in about NIS 900,000.

3

 

 

List of insurance groups: 

 

•

 

The Phoenix group: Phoenix, Hadar

 

•

 

Harel group: Shiloach, Sahar-Zion, Dikla

 

•

 

Clal group: Clal, Aryeh, Ilit

 

•

 

Migdal group: Migdal, Hamagen




Clal

24.4%

Migdal

11.1%

Phoenix

15.1%

Harel (Sahar-Zion)

18.4%

Menorah

6.7%

Direct Insurance

3.3%

Ayalon

6.4%

Eliahu

5.3%

Other

9.4%

Clal

23.1%

Migdal

8.3%

Phoenix

15.9%

Harel (Sahar-Zion) 15.6%

Menorah

6.9%

Direct Insurance

5.5%

Ayalon

8%

Eliahu

7.8%

ILD

3.4%

Other

5.4%

8

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

9

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-4:

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Non-Life Insurance Lines 

in 2001 (excluding Avner and Karnit)

Source:

 data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.

Figure D-5: 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Motor-Vehicle 

Insurance Line in 2001 

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.

Detailing of the insurance groups in the group 'Other' in figureD-5:

AIG – 2.4%, Agricultural insurance – 1.5%, Shomera – 0.3% and Shirbit – 1.2%.




Clal

31.5%

Migdal

13.8%

Phoenix

14.7%

Harel (Sahar-Zion) 

12.6%

Menorah

9.6%

Ayalon

5.4%

Direct Insurance

3.2%

Eliahu

3.1%

Other

6.1%

Clal

36.3%

Migdal

12.8%

Agriculture Insurance

6.5%

Harel (Sahar-Zion)

15.6%

Menorah 2.5%

Phoenix

6.1%

Ayalon

6.5%

Eliahu

4%

ILD 0.9%

10

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

11

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-6: 

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Homeowners Insurance Line 

in 2001 

Source:

 data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.

Detailing of the insurance groups in the group 'Other' in figureD-6:

AIG – 1.9%, Hachsharat Hayeshuv (ILD) – 2.4%, Shomera – 0.7% and Shirbit – 1.1%. 

Figure D-7:

Distribution of Gross Premium by Companies in the Property Loss Insurance Line 

in 2001 

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.




compulsory

motor-vehicle

property

motor-vehicle

homeowners

sickness & 

hospitalization

property 

loss

liabilities

(employer and other)

quarter 1

quarter 2

quarter 3

quarter 4

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

10

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

11

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

In order to examine the concentration in the various lines in 2001, we use the following 

indices: 

1.

 

The Herfindahl-HirschmanIndex(HHI)calculatedbythesumofsquaresofthe

insurance company’s market share out of the total of premiums collected in that line. 

2.

 

The CR3 index that sums up the market share of the 3 large insurance groups out of 

the total of premiums collected in that line. 

 

The results of the concentration indices are specifiedbelow:

Indices/

Lines

Compulsory 

motor-vehicle 

(excluding 

Avner and 

Karnit)

Property mo

-

tor-vehicle

Homeowners

Sickness & 

hospitaliza

-

tion

Property loss

Employer 

liability

HerfindahlHir

-

schman Index

0.13

0.13

0.17

0.29

0.22

0.18

CR3 (In percentage)

52

55

60

78

73

68

As the indices grow bigger, the concentration in the line also increases. 

C.

 

Seasonality 

Figure D-8:

Distribution of Insurance Premiums in the Main Lines, by Quarters in 2001 

(Percent)

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.




12

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

13

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Figure D-8 shows the distribution of insurance premiums over the quarters in the non-life 

insurance lines for 2001. The figureshowsthatinthemotorvehiclelinesthemainpartof

insurance premium payments was done in the 1

st

 quarter of the year compared with the 

other quarters where the distribution is similar (the reason for this is probably the fact that 

collectives, that are an important factor in the property motor-vehicle insurance market, tend 

to arrange motor-vehicle insurances for their workers at the beginning of the year). In the 

property loss line and in the liability (employers and other) lines, the trend is similar. On the 

other hand, in the homeowners line and sickness and hospitalization lines the distribution of 

insurance premiums is similar among all quarters. 




12

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

13

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

3.

 

The reform in the compulsory motor-vehicle 

insurance line 

A.

 

General 

In July 1997, the Motor Vehicle Insurance Law (insurance under Conditions of Managed 

Competition and Transitional Arrangements and Directives regarding Avner) – 1997 

(hereinafter: "Managed Competition Law)" opened the compulsory motor-vehicle insurance 

industry to competition. The main goals of the reform were as follows: 

1.

 

To arrange a competitive structure for the line in order to financiallystreamlineitand

reduce the price of all insurance premiums in the line. 

2.

 

To encourage careful driving by using parameters that reflecttheinsuranceriskforthe

purpose of setting the insurance premium, and preventing the subsidization so that 

each insured will pay his risk premium. 

As one can recall

4

, in consequence of signing the memorandum of understanding between the 

Insurance Commissioner and the insurance companies and the legislation that followed, the 

reform implementation is carried out in two main stages. The first,startingfrom1.4.2001

until 31.12.2002, the validity of Erlich’s letter expired, and the insurance companies are the 

ones setting the insurance rate in the range of 10% above and below a benchmark rate with 

no compensation mechanism on past losses. At the same time, the rate of liability of insurance 

companies in coinsurance was raised to 70% in 2001 and to 80% in 2002 and Avner’s share 

declined correspondingly. At the second stage, starting from 1.1.2003, Avner will not deal, in 

a direct or indirect manner, with any business not related to the settlement of claims

5

. 

B.

 

Rates starting from April 2001 

Starting from April 2001, with the implementation of the firststageofthereforminthe

compulsory motor-vehicle insurance line, the standard rate that was common in the compulsory 

motor-vehicle insurance line was cancelled and the insurance companies were allowed to set 

by themselves the insurance rates in a range of 10% above and below a benchmark rate set by 

the Minister of Finance, based on the recommendations of the database operator. 

The regulations

6

 stipulate that within this range, the insurance companies can set the insurance 

rates and use at their discretion seven risk parameters, set by the Insurance Commissioner 

according to the recommendations of the database operator and with the Insurance 

4

 

 

For further details on the reform and memorandum of understating, see chapter D for the annual 

report of the Capital Market, Insurance and Savings Commissioner for 2000. 

5 

 

Managed Competition Law, section 10B (B). 




14

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

15

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Commissioners’ approval. An insurance company is obligated to use all the parameters 

approved to it by the commissioner. The purpose of these parameters is to evaluate the insured’s 

quality of driving in order to adjust the insurance premium to the insured risk. In addition, 

the insurance companies are entitled to give discounts on the permissible loadings allowed 

to them up to 14.23% of the insurance premium (the loadings are designated to financethe

operational expenses of the companies, including profitandagents’commissions).

The parameters allowed for use in compulsory insurance 

Parameter

Trend

Engine volume 

The rate decreases as the cc increases 

Driver gender 

Lower rate for women drivers 

Driver age

The rate decreases as the age increases 

Driver experience (years licensed)

The rate decreases as the experience increases 

History of road accidents 

The rate increases with the number of car accidents

Deprivation of driver’s license

The rate increases with the number of license deprivations

As of 31.12.01, a major part of the companies used a differential rate. Appendix A specifiesthe

insurance companies and the various parameters they used as of this day. Half of the companies 

that deal with compulsory insurance have used parameters to set the premium: six companies 

used the drivers’ age parameter, four used the driver’s experience parameter and one company 

used six parameters. Eight companies used no parameter for pricing the insurance premium. 

The usage the insurance companies do with various parameters results in a situation where 

insured have different rates in different companies. Selecting an insurance policy is influenced

by three central elements: the insurance cover given in the policy, the identity of the insurance 

company and the amount of premium. In a compulsory insurance the insurance cover is dictated 

by virtue of the law therefore the insured must consider mainly the identity of the insurance 

company, the experience he has with it and the cost of insurance. The practical meaning for 

the public of insured is that when buying compulsory insurance for a car one should consider, 

among other things, the insurance premium charged by the insurance company. Since starting 

from April 2001 this premium is not uniform among all the companies, it is recommended for 

insured to compare between the various companies and rates. 

C.

 

Correct declarations given by insured 

According to the law, compulsory insurance is made for the car rather than for a specific

driver. As long as the insurance premiums were set based on the car characteristics only 

6 

 

Regulations of supervision on insurance businesses (the insurance premiums an insurer is entitled 

to charge from insured in motor vehicle insurance), temporary provision – 2001. 




14

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

15

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

(engine type and size), it was easier for the insurance companies to check the reliability of 

data given by the insured on the car. With the reform implementation, more emphasis will 

be put on the driver’s characteristics, which are the main factors that influencetheinsurance

risk, therefore the insurance companies will have to check various characteristics of the drivers 

using the car, like the age of potential drivers, their history of accidents, the purposes of using 

the car and the like. 

An insurance company can ask the insured questions related to parameters that influencethe

insurance risk, yet it is possible that the insurance company could not condition the insurance 

cover on the correctness of the obtained declarations (for example, the driver age). This 

situation may result in a state where certain insured will have an incentive to give incorrect 

declarations in order to pay a reduced premium, knowing that an incorrect declaration will 

not influencethepaymentofinsurancecompensations.Thissituationmayresultinthe

following consequences: 

A.

 

Rates that do not reflecttheirinsuranceriskwillbegiventoinsuredwhogivefaulty

data, therefore the insurance company will not collect sufficientpremiums.

B.

 

The cost of risk will be rolled over to other insured due to faulty data given by insured.

C.

 

Faulty information will be entered to the database so that the reliability of the database’s 

products will be damaged. 

During 2001 a report of a professional committee appointed by the Insurance Commissioner 

for examining alternatives for coping with incorrect declarations of insured was published. 

According to one of the alternative offered by the committee, a limited finewillbelaidon

insured who gave incorrect declarations due to which they received a reduced premium in 

their compulsory motor-vehicle insurance policy. 

According to the above alternative, an insured who gives incorrect details when buying the 

policy – like the age of driver who will drive the car, his experience in driving, the number of 

license deprivations etc. – will be fined.Thefinewillbelimitedandwillbecollectedbyself

participation when the insurance case happens only from the compensation component for 

the pain and suffering caused to the trafficcasualty

7

,yetnotfromthepaymentformedical

expenses or for the work disability. The amount of finewillbeset,amongotherthings,

according to the influenceoftheincorrectdetailsonthepremiumpaidbytheinsured,like

the mechanism set in section 7 to the Insurance Contract law. Setting the finesrequires,of

course, a legislative change.

D.

 

Claim report 

During 2001 a circular concerning Claim Report in compulsory motor-vehicle insurance was 

published, stipulating the obligation to report in writing in a uniform format on compulsory 

insurance claims for policies that end starting from 1.4.02. For policies that end starting from 




16

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

17

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

1.10.02, the reporting will be extended and will also include a specificationofvariablesthat

influencetheinsurancepremiumsaccordingtothedefinitionsofthedatabaseoperator,even

if the insurer has not used them when calculating the insurance premiums. Moreover, the 

report will include the details of the driver involved in each accident. 

The purpose of circular is to facilitate the underwriting process in compulsory insurance, 

like in property motor-vehicle insurance, by the delivery of a claim report for each insured, 

a report that specifiestheclaimsforbodilyinjuryforeachpolicy.Thespecificationofthe

driver’s details and the variables by which the policy was issued will enable the insurance 

company to better evaluate the risk of each insured and to allow fair and correct pricing of 

the insurance policy. 

E.

 

Database 

As stated, the basis for correct fair competition and pricing of the insurance rates is statistical 

information. One of the most important components in the reform in compulsory motor-

vehicle insurance is the database, which goal is to recommend to the Insurance Commissioner 

and the insurance companies on risk rates. Based on deliberations with the insurance 

companies, a statistical plan was published in July that definesthewayofcollectingdataand

reporting on them to the database. At the request of the insurance companies, the beginning 

of data collection was delayed until 1.10.01. From this date on, information will be collected 

according to the statistical plan from each insured. 

F.

 

Residual insurance 

During 2001, Motor Vehicle Insurance regulations were set (a residual insurance arrangement 

and a mechanism for setting rates), 2001 (hereinafter: "the regulations"). The regulations 

were designated, among other things, to streamline and improve the residual insurance array 

by establishing an arrangement administration, which is a corporation, and by arranging 

a mechanism for setting rates. In August 2001, the insurance companies established the 

Managing Corporation of the Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance Pool (the pool) Ltd 

according to the regulations. Moreover a CEO and board of directors were appointed to the 

company, workers were recruited and an information system was established. 

The residual insurance is basically in loss. The financingofitslossesisimposedonallinsured

in compulsory insurance. A private car and motorcycles under private ownership that are 

insured by residual insurance pay an addition of 25% whereas any other vehicle pays an 

addition of 35% to the market rates as set in the regulations. In order to financethelosses

7

 

 

The payment for pain and suffering is set in the regulations of compensations to traffic accident 

casualties (the calculation of compensation for damage other than in property) – 1976 and may 

reach up to NIS 133,000 per casualty, depending on the degrees of disability set for him or the 

duration of hospitalization. At the absence of disability or hospitalization days, the maximum 

amount is up to 10% of the above amount. 




16

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

17

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

of the residual insurance, as expected due to the motorcycle insurance

8

, in a rate lower than 

their risk rates, 4.3% were added to the risk premium of all vehicles, meaning a total of NIS 

116 million a year. 

G.

 

Avner 

The Motor Vehicle Insurance Law (insurance under conditions of managed competition, 

transitional arrangements and directives regarding Avner), 1997 stipulates that starting from 

2003, Avner will no longer serve as a common insurer in the compulsory motor-vehicle 

insurance line. From now on Avner will only deal with matters related to the settlement of 

past claims of trafficaccidentcasualties.

According to the memorandum of understanding

9

, in December 2001 a new board of 

directors was appointed for Avner which role is, among other things, to assure correct and 

orderly transfer of Avner to management by a special manager in 2003. 

8

 

 

The population insured in the pool other than motorcycles and that is not under a short-term 

insurance cover is very small. 

9

 

 

For the memorandum of understating refer to Chapter D of the Commissioner’s report on the 

Capital Market, Insurance and Savings 2000. 




18

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

19

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

4.

 

Rates in property motor-vehicle insurance

A.

 

Cancellation of minimum premium 

According to the provisions of the law, an insurance company that is interested in introducing 

an insurance plan into the property motor-vehicle line (self and third party) must firstobtain

the approval of the Insurance Commissioner. In order to obtain approval for the insurance 

premium, the insurance company is required to provide certain data to the Commissioner, 

like the full rate formula and a list of the parameters and their values.

Most of the insurance companies, in the framework of the rate formula, used to combine 

a parameter of Minimum Premium, which is the minimum amount an insurance company 

intends to charge from different insured as insurance premiums. Minimum premium means 

that although the risk data of a specificinsuredindicatethatheshouldpayacertainamount,

in fact he will be required to pay a higher amount. 

These are two examples for the minimum premiums used by the various insurance companies 

during 2000: 

Company A

 

private car – NIS 2,582

 

commercial car - NIS 3,095

Company B

 

private car – NIS 2,016

 

commercial car – NIS 2,419 

After reviewing the matter of minimum premium and due to the desire to reduce cross 

subsidizations between different insured and establish actuary rates by which each insured 

pays according to his insurance risk, the Commissioner of Insurance published in August 

2001 an insurance circular that instructs the insurance companies to submit for approval rate 

formulas that do not include minimum premiums. According to the circular instructions, the 

companies have submitted new rate formulas for the property motor-vehicle insurance line. 

B.

 

Review of the rate formulas 

The rate formula consists of a risk premium and loadings. The risk premium is in fact the 

expected cost incurred by the insurance company due to paying claims and settling claims: 

the payment due to the damage caused to the insured, including any expenses the insurance 

company may have incurred for settling the claim, like lawyers and investigators. The 

loadings include the expected cost due to the issue of policy, like marketing expenses and 

agents’ commission and the profitcomponent.

Setting the risk premium is done while considering three main components:

1.

 

The cost of risk due to an accident that causes damage to the insured’s car. 

2.

 

The cost of risk due to an accident that causes damage to the car of a third party

10

. 

10

 

 

The payment of the insurance company for this component is usually limited by an upper limit. 




18

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

19

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

3.

 

The cost of risk due to theft or an attempt to steal the insured’s car. 

In order to set a differential risk premium that considers the specificriskcharacteristicsof

each insured, the insurance company will set the cost of the various components indicated 

above. It should be noted that in the property motor-vehicle insurance line, the insurance 

companies use many diversifiedparametersforevaluatingtherisk.

The cost of risk due to an accident

 is directly related to the characteristics of the car drivers. 

Usually as the driver’s age grows higher and as his experience increases, the cost of risk due to 

an accident decreases. Moreover, in certain ages the driver’s gender and marital status are also 

influential(singleormarried).Atcertainagesthecostofriskduetoanaccidentforwomen

is lower than for men, and the cost of risk of married people is lower than the cost of risk for 

singles. The reasons for this are diversified:itispossiblethatwomenaremorecarefulthan

men, yet it is also possible that women drive less than men. This is also true for marital status. 

It is possible that married people drive more carefully yet there may be other reasons as well. 

Additional characteristics of a driver that are relevant to the cost of risk due to an accident 

are as follows: 

1.

 

Number of drivers authorized to drive the car (as the number of authorized drivers 

increases, the cost of risk also increases, because the car is used for longer periods of time 

or since certain drivers are more dangerous). 

2.

 

The insurance history of the driver. If an insured has not filedanypropertymotor-

vehicle claims against the insurance company in the last years, this may indicate of the 

driver’s nature. 

The cost of risk due to an accident

 is also influencedbythe

car’scharacteristics

,likethe

car’s manufacturer, its weight and whether this is a private or commercial car, is the car being 

used as the main car or as a secondary car etc. 

It should be noted that to the matter of calculating the cost of risk due to damage to a third 

party, there is a substantial difference between the insurance companies regarding the way 

they calculate the cost of risk. Some of the companies use a differential rate according to the 

driver’s characteristics, yet some insurance companies collect a fixedamountforathirdparty

cover though these are different drivers. 

The cost of risk due to a theft 

is very much influencedbythevalueofthecar.Asthevalueof

the car increases, the consequences of theft lay higher cost on the insurance company. Another 

important component of the cost of risk is the probability of stealing various cars. There are 

different types of vehicles with a high probability of theft and there are other vehicles which 

probability of theft is lower. All the probabilities may change within a short time (for example 




20

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

21

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

a change in the thieves’ preferences). Therefore the insurance companies run a current follow 

up on the types of vehicles and the frequency in which they are stolen. 

In summary, since the insurance companies differ both in the way they calculate the rate and 

in the parameters they consider in the formula, it is bound to have differences in the amount 

of premiums they charge from the same insured. In addition, it should be noted that if two 

companies use the same parameter, for example the drivers’ age, it is possible that in a certain 

company, X age groups will be definedandinanothercompanyYagegroupswillbedefined,

with all that is implied. Due to these reasons it is important to carry out a market survey 

before buying insurance. 




20

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

21

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

5.

 

The terrorist attack of September 11

th

 

and its implications 

 

The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in the USA on September 11

th

 2001 and 

the declaration of war of the American government on international terrorism that followed 

have influencedtheinternationalandtheIsraeliinsurancemarket.Thecombinationofthe

security state in Israel and the high number of terrorist attacks have created a certain problem 

with the insurance availability and an appreciation of rates in part of the insurance lines. 

Claims against reinsurers due to the attack have considerably decreased the free capital in the 

insurance market, and have lead to a decline in the risk capacity they are willing to receive. 

The decline in free capital in the reinsurance market (decline in supply) results in increased 

rates, especially in catastrophe insurance lines (for example earthquakes) and causes a problem 

of insurance availability for certain lines and insured. 

For example, due to the appreciation of insurance rates because of war risks for cargos in 

watercrafts coming to the Israeli ports, it was feared that this will affect the import and export 

of cargos. In order not to interfere with the trafficofgoodstoandfromtheportsinIsrael,it

was decided to adapt an arrangement by which the governmental insurance company Inbal 

Insurance Company Ltd (hereinafter: "Inbal") will sell policies for cargo insurance against war 

damages within the territorial waters of the state. As part of the arrangement it was established 

that the state, through Property Tax and Compensation Fund, would compensate Inbal in 

case of claims, so that Inbal will bear no risk on these policies. The policy was approved in 

November 2001 and may be extended up to a range of 30 nautical miles from the shoreline 

of the state of Israel. 

In addition to the regulation of the marine cargo insurance, in the course of the year, the 

Division has reviewed the insurance availability for seam areas like the industrial areas in 

Atarot and Barkan that have suffered from difficultiesinachievinginsurance.




22

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

23

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

6.

 

Cancellation of venue stipulation in insurance 

contracts 

Insurance companies used to include in many insurance policies a condition that determines 

in what venue will claims regarding the policy be clarified,usuallyinTelAviv.Sucha

condition limits the freedom of choice of the insured regarding the place of claim against the 

insurance company and also restricts their right to ask for transferring the discussion if an 

insured is sued by the insurance company.

Therefore the Commissioner of Insurance has published a circular stipulating that insurance 

companies will not add into new insurance contracts sections that limit the insured’s freedom 

of choice of a certain court. In addition, it was set that insurance companies will cancel, 

starting from 1.5.03, the sections that limit the venue to certain courts in existing insurance 

contracts. In insurance contracts where the insurance period is longer than a year, the 

insurance companies were required to notify the insured in writing of this matter. 

It should be noted that the circular instructions shall apply to insurance contracts in all insurance 

lines, including group insurance contracts, except for business insurance contracts (property, 

directors etc.) for which an insurance contract that is not a uniform contract was made. 




premium

 

expenses

 

claims

 

profits

1,400,000

1,200,000

1,000,000

800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

0

2000

2001

22

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

23

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

7.

 

Health insurance 

A.

 

Introduction 

During 2001 rules were set for extending the proper disclosure given to an insured in health 

insurance policies when joining the insurance and within an annual report. Moreover, an 

offer for instructions for long-term care insurance policies (individual) was published, new 

insurance policies for foreign workers were approved, according to the instructions set in the 

Foreign Workers Law and an offer for the content of the actuarial memorandum that an 

insurance company has to submit, when applying for a health insurance policy approval or 

when changing an existing plan, was published. 

B.

 

Business results in the sickness and hospitalization line 

The scope of activity in the sickness and hospitalization line in 2001 shows a continued 

growth in the line over the last years. This increase is reflectedbyanincreaseofabout8%in

the amount of insurance premiums in relation to the insurance premiums in 2000. 

 

Loss ratio 

The loss ratio is the ratio of gross claims (paid claims and changes in pending claims) to total 

premiums. The data indicates a decline of about 6% in the Loss Ratio, from about 63% in 

2000 to about 60% in 2001. This change may indicate a growth in profitability.

It should be noted that the sickness and hospitalization line does not cover the entire activity 

in the fieldofhealthinsurance,aspartofitisreportedunderlifeinsurance(likelong-term

care insurance). 

Figure D-9 shows the main data of the financialresultsintheline.

 

Figure 

D

-9:

Business Results in the Sickness and Hospitalization Line in 2000-2001 

(NIS thousand, December 2001 prices)

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.




24

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

25

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

Market data in the Sickness and Hospitalization line 

Figure D-10 shows the continued concentration of the line as presented in the Commissioner’s 

report of 2000, as half of the insurance premiums are in the Harel group (a decline of 1% 

in relation to 2000). The main changes compared with 2000 are in the insurance premiums 

held by the other three groups: an growth in the Clal group, a decline in the Phoenix group 

and growth in the Migdal group. The market share of the four large insurance groups is about 

89% (like the data of 2000). It should be also mentioned that an insurance premium rate of 

1.9% (it appears under another name in the figure)includestheAyalonCompanythatholds

about 1.76% and other companies that hold less than 0.1%. 

Figure D-10:

Distribution of Gross Insurance Premiums by Companies in the Sickness and 

Hospitalization Line in 2001

Source

: data from the annual reports of the insurance companies and processing of the Capital 

Market, Insurance and Savings Division.

Detailing of the insurance companies in the insurance groups: 

1.

 

Harel group – Shiloach, Sahar Zion, Dikla 

2.

 

The Phoenix group – The Phoenix, Hadar

3.

 

Migdal group – Migdal, Hamagen

4.

 

Clal group – Clal, Aryeh, Ilit

5.

 

Other – Ayalon, AIG, Shomera, Shirbit, Direct Insurance 

C.

 

Long-term care insurance 

1)

 

Background 

Long-term care insurance is designated to provide financingsupporttoapersonwhoneeds

supervision or those who are incapable of doing daily activities, like eating, walking or getting 

dressed by themselves.

Long-term care cases usually occur after the age of 75 hence the insurance cover must continue 

Clal

11.7%

Migdal

12.8%

Phoenix

17.4%

Harel

 

(Sahar-Zion)

47.5%

Menorah

8.7%

Other 1.9%




24

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

25

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

for an extended period so that the insurance period in the policy will be to the entire insured’s 

life and the insurance company will not be allowed to terminate the insurance. 

Within the framework of the Health Insurance Law, National Security offers a basic level of 

monthly long-term care treatment for eligible insured – men of 65 and up and women of 60 

and up who live at home and need the help of another person for carrying out daily activities 

or who need supervision at home for their safety, according to tests and to the eligibility terms 

set by the law.

According to the instructions of the National Health Insurance law, sick funds are not 

allowed to offer long-term care insurance plans. They were specificallyexcludedfromthe

law due to the long-term implications of this insurance that requires risk management and 

long-term financialreserves.Therefore,insurancecompaniesprovidethelong-termcare

insurance. It should be noted that the increase in life expectancy and the aging of population, 

the increase in the standard of living, have raised the demand for buying a long-term care 

insurance policy. 

Most of the long-term care insurance offered by the insurance companies consists of group 

insurances that are sold mainly to sick funds’ members. It should be noted that more than 3 

million people have long-term care insurance through the sick funds. 

Policies for long-term care insurance offer monthly payments at a fixedamount(several

thousands shekels) or indemnify for the recovery of expenses an insured may incur for getting 

long-term care services. The period of insurance compensation payment when an insured is 

in nursing care usually ranges between three years to life. 

The unique characteristics of long-term care insurance and selling it within the framework of 

a limited period group policy are problematic. In the contract entered with the policy holder 

(the group representative – sick fund, employer etc.) the insurance period is set for a few years, 

usually with no assurance of continuity to the insured in case of terminating the agreement 

between the policyholder and the insurance company. This means that the insured may be 

left on the one hand with no insurance cover in case that the insurance policy is not renewed 

and on the other hand, with no option to buy another policy for long-term care insurance 

due to his health condition. In addition, group policies of long-term care insurance are 

characterized by premiums based on cross-age and gender subsidization. This may result in a 

dramatic increase in premiums for the subsidized insured. The Commissioner of Insurance is 

examining the required regulation for a group long-term care insurance. 

2)

 

Guidance on long-term care insurance (individual) 

During 2001, the Commissioner of Insurance has published guidance for insurance companies 

regarding long-term care insurance in individual policies. The guidance set rules to assure 

long-term appropriate cover, while maintaining the stability of the insurance business.

These are the main instructions: 

1.

 

Long-term care insurance will be sold as long-term insurance that provides assurance 

for the range of ages where the insured is particularly exposed to risk. Meaning an 




26

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

27

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

insurance company cannot terminate the insurance in a unilateral manner throughout 

the insured’s life.

2.

 

Due to the importance of this insurance it was established that buying the long-

term care insurance will be done independently with no obligation to buy additional 

insurances. 

3.

 

The insurance company will not be entitled to raise the scale of premiums but only 

subject to obtaining an approval in advance from the Commissioner of Insurance 

and in any case not before the end of 5 years since the approval to operate the policy 

or since a prior approval for the raise. There is an option to change a premium in 

health insurances in general and in long-term care insurance in particular since these 

insurances are sold for extended periods , for the entire life of an insured (tens of years) 

and the insurance company has a difficultyincommittingtoanunchangingpremium.

This difficultyisderived,amongotherthings,fromthelimiteddataavailable,changes

in the cost of medical services, and uncertainty regarding future developments that may 

influencethelevelofrisksinthefield.

4.

 

The insurance premium from the age of 65 and on will be level premium that does 

not change with the insured’s age. This instruction was set since the function of the 

insurance risk from which the insurance premiums are derived increases sharply at the 

very old ages, a fact that makes it difficultforaninsuredtopayasuitableriskpremium

in these ages. 

5.

 

For any payment at level premium by the insured, the insurance company accumulates 

a reserve for the insured. Level premium payment means that the insured pays an 

amount that is higher than his insurance risk, therefore a surplus is accrued in his favor. 

An insured who terminates the insurance will still have reduced cover according to the 

amount accumulated for him (paid-up values). 

D.

 

Health insurance for foreign workers 

Health insurance policies for foreign workers have been marketed by several insurance 

companies for some years now. Policies that were common until October 2001 provided 

cover for various medical expenses, during and not during hospitalization, and compensation 

for death and disability due to an accident (individual accident insurance). The provided 

covers were limited both in the type of covers and in the total amount of insurance for all 

covers in the policy, and no cover was provided for a physical condition that an insured may 

have had before the beginning of insurance. So that for example, these policies did not cover 

pregnancy, chronic sickness and AIDS. 

Over the last years the number of foreign workers who stay in Israel has increased. With 

the increase in the number of foreign workers, the demand for social services for them and 

for their families, such as education, health and welfare services, has increased among that 

population. The phenomena of foreign workers, its scope and dimensions and social and 




26

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

27

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

financialimplicationshasbecomeacentralissueonthepublicagenda.

On the background of the stated above, the Arrangement Law of 2000, in the amendment 

for the Foreign Workers Law (unlawful employment) - 1991, the rules for the terms of 

employment of foreign workers in Israel were updated in order to assure reasonable and fair 

working conditions for the foreign workers. This law stipulates, among other things, that it is 

obligatory for any employer to arrange health insurance for the foreign workers to their entire 

period of employment with that employer and that the insurance will provide a minimal 

cover as will set in an order of the Minister of Health. 

Therefore the Minister of Health has published the Foreign Workers order (prohibition on 

unlawful employment and assurance of fair conditions) (medical cover for the worker) – 2001, 

that came into force on October 2001. The purpose of order was to assure proper medical 

services for foreign workers and try to prevent exploitation of the medical infrastructure in 

Israel by medical immigration. This order stipulates that the scope of cover an employer must 

arrange for his worker will be basically similar to the national health basket given to Israeli 

citizens according to the National Health Insurance law. 

In consequence of the order publication in 2001, new insurance policies for foreign workers 

were approved. These are the main characteristics of these policies: 

•

 

As stated, the scope of insurance cover and its availability are basically similar to 

the national health basket given to Israeli citizens according to the National Health 

Insurance law, including cover for medical services during pregnancy at the end of 9 

months of work. In addition it stipulates cover for medical treatments in consequence 

of work accidents in the interim until the determination of the National Insurance 

Institution. In case that a specialist determines that a worker cannot work, an insurance 

cover will be provided until his medical condition stabilizes, so that the worker could 

return to his origin country. 

•

 

In health insurance policies it is common to have a restriction by which the insurer may 

limit the insurance cover if the insurance case has resulted from a medical condition that 

the insured have had before joining the insurance. The regulation sets a certain cover in 

a case of pre-existing medical condition. After three years since the foreign worker has 

arrived to Israel (or from the day the order comes into force regarding a worker who 

was already in Israel at the time of setting the order), the insurance company would not 

be able to decline a claim by arguing that the medical treatment is for a pre-existing 

condition. In any case the insurance company is obligated to financehealthtreatments

until the worker’s medical condition stabilizes. 

•

 

In case of a dispute regarding the fitnessforworkorwhetherthemedicaltreatmentis

required due to a pre-existing condition, a mechanism was set by which the worker is 

entitled to submit the opinion of a doctor on his behalf.




28

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

29

2001

NON-LIFE INSURANCE

•

 

In a large part of the policies there is cover for a death and disability insurance due to 

an accident. This cover is in addition to the covers bound by the order. 

E.

 

Proper disclosure in group health insurance 

In October 2001 “proper disclosure for the insured was applied when joining health 

insurance policies” (circular 2001/9). The rules of proper disclosure establish what are 

the main details of information to be given by insurance companies to the insured when 

buying a health insurance policy. The solidificationofguidancewasdoneduetotheneedto

increase the transparency and disclosure toward the insured, especially on the background of 

the complexity of health insurance policies (a detailing in this matter may be found in the 

division’s guidance for 1999).

On the background of this circular’s guidance for proper disclosure for individual insurances, 

the guidance was also extended to group insurances. It was established that starting from June 

2002 an insurer will provide to any individual or a group of people insured in a group health 

insurance the insurance policy and a detailing of the information included in the circular 

with certain adjustments, like indication of the insurance duration and the term of agreement 

between the policy holder and the insurer and the insured’s rights in case that the agreement 

expires or if he leaves the group.

It should be emphasized that in group insurance, there is particular importance to the 

disclosure provided to an insured regarding the insurance conditions, since in this insurance, 

the insured does not sign the insurance agreement directly with the insurer therefore they are 

not aware of the details in the insurance p

lan. 

F.

 

Prohibition of selling policies for supplementary medical covers to 

trafficaccidentcasualties

In recent years various insurance companies have been selling policies that offer medical 

covers for trafficcasualtiesinadditiontothecoversprovidedinthemotor-vehiclecompulsory

insurance. These policies offer, for example, compensation for a private operation, medical 

examinations or hospitalization due to a trafficaccident.Thecostofpolicieswasbetween

about NIS 70 and NIS 200 a year. 

These policies have offered to provide insurance cover for trafficcasualtiesinadditiontothe

insurance cover given to them according to the motor-vehicle compulsory insurance policy 

that provides insurance cover according to the TrafficAccidentCompensationLaw–1975.

This law provides trafficcasualtiesbroadvarietyofrightswhichpurposeistoreinstatetheir

condition to their condition prior to the accident. In order to achieve this purpose, the 

casualty gets insurance compensations under the motor-vehicle compulsory insurance due to 

several factors of damage: medical expenses, compensation for inability to earn a living and 

compensations for pain and suffering. The health insurance cover is very broad, even broader 

than the cover given according to the National Health Insurance law. 




NON-LIFE INSURANCE

During 2001, among other things, on the background of public complaints in the matter, the 

Commissioner of Insurance has reviewed the way of marketing and scope of use of policies 

by insured. It turned out that since January 1999 until the end of 2001 almost 100,000 

policies of this type were sold, with the compulsory motor-vehicle insurance policy or with 

the motor-vehicle comprehensive insurance. These policies were sold in most cases through 

a joining form attached to the compulsory motor-vehicle insurance certificate,thereforeit

was sometimes bought absentmindedly or thinking this is compulsory insurance rather than a 

voluntary cover that stands for itself. It was also found that insured have hardly made any use 

of the policies and only a few claims were filed(4claimsasoftheendof2001).

The review results show that due to the broad medical cover already provided under the 

compulsory motor-vehicle insurance and due to the method of marketing these policies and 

their way of management, the policies fail to provide a real insurance cover. Therefore the 

Commissioner of Insurance has decided to instruct the insurers to stop selling these policies 

as of 1.1.02. 


The insurance company is obligated to use all the parameters approved to it as specifiedinthetable.

Subject to the approval of the Commissioner, a company may change the rate approved to it. 

The rate is standard for all private motor vehicles insured by the same insurance company, 

and may vary from company to company, pursuant to the approval of the Commissioner of 

Insurance. 
DEFINITION OF 'PROPERTY INSURANCE'
A policy that provides financial reimbursement to the owner or renter of a structure and its contents, in the event of damage or theft. Property insurance can include homeowners insurance, renters insurance, flood insurance and earthquake insurance. Personal property is generally covered by a homeowners or renters policy, unless it is of particularly high value, in which case it can usually be covered by purchasing an addition to the policy called a "rider". If a claim is filed, the property insurance policy will either reimburse the policyholder for the actual value of the damage, or the replacement cost to remedy the damage. 


INVESTOPEDIA EXPLAINS 'PROPERTY INSURANCE'
Perils typically covered by property insurance include damage caused by fire, smoke, wind, hail, weight of ice and snow, lightning, theft and more. Property insurance also provides liability coverage in case someone other than the property owner or renter is injured while on the property, and decides to sue.
Home Property Insurance

Whether you own or rent, live in a two-story house or high-rise condo, your home and its contents are likely among your biggest investments. Make sure they're protected with home property insurance from State Farm®. Our home property insurance coverage is packaged with liability protection, backed by one of the world's largest claims networks, and available with a variety of great discounts to fit your budget.What is It?

Property and liability insurance protects your home and personal property from loss. It includes medical payments coverage in case someone gets hurts on your property, which helps protect your assets if you're found liable. We offer home property insurance for:

Homeowners
Condo unitowners
Manufactured homeowners
Renters
We also offer property and liability coverage for farms and ranches and small business owners, as well as home or condo associations, apartment buildings, and other commercial buildings with tenant-occupied units.
Insurance companies are generally classified as either mutual, or stock companies, but this is a traditional distinction as true mutual companies are becoming very rare. Mutual companies are owned by their policyholders, while share- / stockholders (who may or may not own policies) own stock insurance companies.

Broadly speaking, insurance carriers may be classified as:

Life insurance companies, which sell life insurance, annuities and pensions products. Life, annuity, and pension business is very long-term in nature — coverage for life assurance or a pension can cover risks over many decades, and explains why this type of insurance is also called “long term insurance”.

Non-life (or ‘general’) insurance companies that sell "other" types of insurance. By contrast to life insurers, non-life insurance cover usually covers a shorter period - such as one year - which is why this type of insurance is also called “short term insurance”.

General insurance companies can be subdivided into:

Standard lines / personal lines  insurers that are typically "main stream" lines insurers that specialize in  motor, home or commercial insurance that may even be made available directly to the public , or

Excess lines insurers that typically insure risks not covered by the standard lines market. They are broadly referred as being all insurance placed with non-admitted insurers. Non-admitted (USA) insurers are not licensed in the states where the risks are located. These companies have more flexibility and can react faster than standard insurance companies because they are not subject to the same regulations.

____________________________

Annuities provide a ‘stream of payments’ and are generally classified as insurance because they are issued by insurance companies, regulated as insurance and require the same kinds of actuarial and investment management expertise that life insurance requires. Annuities and pensions that pay a benefit for life are sometimes regarded as insurance against the possibility that a retiree will outlive his or her financial resources. In that sense, they are the complement of life insurance and, from an underwriting perspective, are the mirror image of life insurance. 

Aviation insurance insures against hull, spares, deductible, hull war and liability risks. Aviation insurance distinguishes between commercial and non-commercial craft.

Car collision
Boiler insurance (also known as equipment breakdown insurance) insures against accidental physical damage to equipment or machinery.

Builder's risk insurance insures against the risk of physical loss or damage to property during construction. Builder's risk insurance is typically written on an "all risk" basis covering damage due to any cause (including the negligence of the insured) not expressly excluded from the policy.

Casualty insurance insures against accidents, not necessarily tied to any specific property. 

Commercial insurance is based on the needs of businesses.  These policies can be adjusted according to a business' unique requirements, i.e. in respect of it's general contents risk,  theft of stock risk, electronic equipment, documents (such as handbooks, manuals, computer discs, books, etc.), specialised equipment risk, loss of income caused by damage to buildings or equipment. Forms of commercial insurance are constituted by specialized policies in respect of Plant All-Risk and Engineering Works (amongst others). In South Africa there is a common basis of commercial insurance contract wordings, referred to as Multimark3 / Multimark III policies. Although it is (was) an industry agreed wording since 1987, many insurers have (over time) amended the MMIII wording for themselves, and such policies deviate from the original wording, despite still being referred to - within the industry - as Multimark III  policies.

Credit insurance repays some - or all - of a loan back when certain things happen to the borrower, such as unemployment, disability or death. Mortgage insurance is in fact a form of credit insurance, but credit insurance really refers to policies that cover other kinds of debt.

Crime insurance insures the insured against losses arising from the criminal acts of third parties. For example, a company can obtain crime insurance to cover losses arising from theft or embezzlement.

Crop insurance reduces / manages various risks associated with growing crops and are typically found in farming policies. Such risks include crop loss or damage caused by weather, hail, drought, frost damage, insects, or disease.

Directors and officers liability insurance protects an organization from costs associated with litigation resulting from mistakes by directors and / or officers, for which the organisation is liable. In the industry, it is usually called "D&O insurance” for short.

Disability insurance provides financial support in the event the insured is unable to work because of a disabling illness or injury.

Environmental liability insurance protects the insured from bodily injury, property damage and cleanup costs as a result of the dispersal, release or escape of pollutants. See "Pollution Insurance".

Errors and omissions insurance: See Professional indemnity insurance.

Expatriate insurance provides individuals and organizations operating outside of their home country with protection for automobiles, property, health, liability and business pursuits.

Financial loss insurance protects individuals and companies against various financial risks, such as  a business might purchase cover to protect it from loss of sales if a fire in a factory prevented it from carrying out its business for a period. This  is frequently referred to as "business interruption insurance". however, insurance might also cover the failure of a 3rd party creditor to pay money it owes to the insured. 

Fidelity- and surety bonds (also court bonds) are often included as a type of financial loss insurance. These products - often a 3 party relationship - provide a benefit to the bond holder in the event the “insured” party fails to perform its obligations. (Although a surety bond resembles insurance, it can be argued that it is in most occasions not insurance, but in fact sui generis. Similar to annuities, the transaction is deemed  as insurance.

Fire insurance: See Property insurance.

Health insurance policies will often cover the cost (or part thereof) of an individual and his/herdependants’ medical costs.

Home owner’s insurance: See “Property Insurance”.

House contents insurance provides insurance for possessions against fire, flood and all of the ‘traditional’ perils, but also against theft, robbery and burglary. As a subcategory of house contents insurance we find portable effects insurance that guard against loss of possessions that travel with you i.e. laptops, cell phones, jewellery etc.

Kidnap and ransom insurance is - for obvious reasons as a result of the nature of the insurance - a very discreet type of policy.

Liability insurance is a very broad category that covers legal claims against the insured. Many types of insurance include an aspect of liability coverage; often a home owner's insurance policy will include public liability that protects the insured in the event of a claim brought by someone who slips and falls on the property; motor insurance also includes an aspect of liability insurance that indemnifies against the harm that a crashing car can cause to others' lives, health, or property. The protection offered by a liability insurance policy is twofold: legal costs cover in respect of a defence raised in the event of a lawsuit commenced against the insured, and indemnification with respect to a settlement or verdict. (Liability policies typically cover only the negligence – not wilful or intentional acts - of the insured.) Specialist legal cost policies are also available.

Livestock insurance (typically included within farming policies) insures livestock loss against fire. See also “crop insurance”.

Life insurance provides a monetary benefit to a decedent's family or other designated beneficiary, and may specifically provide for income to an insured person's family, burial, funeral and other final expenses. Life insurance policies often allow the option of having the proceeds paid to the beneficiary either in a lump sum cash payment, or an annuity.

Marine insurance (inland marine insurance being distinguished from ‘normal’ marine insurance business) and marine cargo insurance cover the loss or damage of ships at sea or on inland waterways, and of the cargo that may be on them. When the owner of the cargo and the carrier are separate entities, marine cargo insurance typically compensates the owner of cargo for losses sustained from fire, shipwreck, etc., but excludes losses that can be recovered from the carrier or the carrier's insurance. Many marine insurance underwriters will include "time element" coverage in such policies, which extends the indemnity to cover loss of profit and other business expenses attributable to the delay caused by a covered loss.

Mortgage insurance insures the lender against default by the borrower.

Motor insurance (known in the USA as 'automobile insurance') is probably the most common form of insurance and may cover both legal liability claims against the driver and loss of or damage to the insured's vehicle itself. Motor insurance is extended over cars, commercial vehicles, caravans and trailers, as well as motorcycles. As specialist forms of motor insurance we find fleet insurance schemes specializing in large volumes of vehicles, and that motor traders (internal) and motor traders (external) are distinguished from one another.

Motor car accident
Pet insurance insures pets against accidents and illnesses - some companies cover routine / wellness care and burial, as well.

Political risk insurance can be taken out by businesses with operations in countries in which there is a risk that revolution or other political conditions will result in a loss. See SASRIA.

Pollution Insurance can be either:

A first-party coverage for contamination of insured property either by external, or on-site sources, or

Coverage for liability to third parties arising from contamination of air, water, or land due to the sudden and accidental release of hazardous materials from the insured site. The policy usually covers the costs of cleanup and may include coverage for releases from underground storage tanks. Intentional acts are specifically excluded.

Professional indemnity insurance (also ‘professional liability insurance’), protects professional practitioners such as architects, lawyers, doctors, and accountants against potential negligence claims made by their patients / clients. Professional liability insurance may take on different names depending on the profession, as liability insurance i.r.o. the medical profession can be termed malpractice insurance, or notaries may take out errors and omissions insurance (E&O).

Property insurance provides homeowners protection against risks such as fire, theft or weather damage. This may includes a bouquet of specialized forms of insurance such as fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake insurance, home insurance and boiler insurance. See also household contents - and portable effects insurance.

Purchase insurance is aimed at providing protection on the products people purchase. Purchase insurance can cover individual purchase protection, warranties, guarantees, care plans and even mobile phone insurance. Such insurance is normally very limited in the scope of problems that are covered by the policy.

Retrospectively Rated Insurance is not so much a line of insurance business, as a method of establishing a policy's premium (typically on a large commercial account). The premium is based on the insured's actual loss experience during the policy term, sometimes subject to a minimum and maximum premium, with the final premium determined by a formula. Under this plan, the current year's premium is based partially (or wholly) on the current year's losses, although the premium adjustments may take months or years beyond the current year's expiration date. The rating formula is guaranteed in the insurance contract, i.e. retrospective premium = converted loss + basic premium × tax multiplier. Numerous variations of this formula have been developed, and are in use.

Social insurance can be many things to many people in many countries, but essentially it is a collection of insurance coverage including components of life insurance, disability income insurance, unemployment insurance, health insurance and others), plus retirement savings, on the basis of mandatory participation by all citizens. By forcing everyone in society to contribute, it ensures that everyone can become a claimant when he / she needs to. Along the way this inevitably becomes related to other concepts such as the justice system and the welfare state.

Terrorism insurance provides protection against any loss or damage caused by terrorist activities.

Title insurance provides a guarantee that title to real property is vested in the seller, free and clear of liens or encumbrances. It is usually issued in conjunction with a search of the public records performed at the time of a real estate transaction.

Total, permanent disability insurance provides benefits when a person is permanently disabled - very strict tests - and can no longer work in their profession, often taken as an adjunct to life insurance.

Travel insurance is an insurance cover taken by those who travel abroad, which covers certain losses such as medical expenses, lost of personal belongings, travel delay, personal liabilities, etc.

Volcano insurance is an insurance that covers volcano damage (i.e. in Hawaii).

Watercraft insurance insures most watercraft used for social purposes, i.e. yachts, catamarans, dinghies, motor boats, rubber ducks and jet skis etc. All machinery and motors, standard fittings, gears, equipment and fitted accessories included, and cover exists not only when the craft is ashore or afloat, but also when transported. Medical costs, third party liability and optional water-skiers liability cover can also be included.

Workers' compensation insurance replaces all or part of a worker's wages lost and accompanying medical expense incurred because of a job-related injury. Typically, this forms part of "Social insurance".
Introduction
This is a guide to help you understand the
fundamentals of insurance and takaful. It tells you
about the types of insurance and takaful products
available and the basic principles of insurance and
takaful.
What is insurance?
You buy insurance to transfer the risk of loss to the
insurance company and thereby reduce your financial
hardship when you suffer the loss. For example, if your
insured motor vehicle is involved in an accident, your
insurance company will pay for the cost of repair. You
buy insurance by paying a premium to your insurance
company.
What is takaful?
Takaful is an insurance scheme based on Islamic
principles of joint guarantee, where a group of
participants agrees to mutually guarantee among
themselves against a defined loss. If you join a takaful
scheme, you agree to donate a certain portion of the
contribution into a takaful fund to assist any member
of the fund who has suffered any defined loss.
Depending on the terms of the takaful certificate, a
participant may also be able to share in the surplus of
a takaful fund if he has not made a claim during the
period of takaful. Anyone can join a takaful scheme
regardless of his religious beliefs.Why buy insurance or join a takaful scheme?
The purpose of having insurance/ takaful is to reduce
your financial burden when you suffer from losses or
mishap so that there is minimal disruption to you and
your family’s daily activities. However, an insurance/
takaful plan only covers you for losses specified in
the plan. Therefore, if you are getting any insurance/
takaful, make sure it covers the losses you need to
protect.What type of insurance/ takaful products do I
need?
Your insurance/ takaful needs depend on your personal
situation, age and lifestyle. However, certain types of
insurance/ takaful are required by law, e.g. if you own
a motor vehicle, the law requires you to have a cover
to pay for liability caused by you to others.What are the types of insurance/ takaful
products available?
You can get different types of insurance/ takaful
to cover things you own, your life, your health and
for your retirement. You can find many types of
products that can meet your needs. The common
types of insurance/ takaful products are:
s ,IFE INSURANCE FAMILY TAKAFUL which is usually
used as a means to provide financial aid for your
dependants if you die. You may also save or
invest through life insurance/ family takaful. Some
life insurance/ family takaful products also pay
out when you are unable to work due to illness
or disability. Examples of life insurance/ takaful
products are whole life/endowment, ordinary
family and investment-linked.
s -OTOR INSURANCE TAKAFUL which pays for
specific losses due to damage to your motor
vehicle involved in an accident. It also pays for
losses that your motor vehicle caused to others in
an accident.(OUSEOWNER HOUSEHOLDER INSURANCETAKAFUL
which pays for specific losses when your home or
your personal assets are damaged due to events
like fire, flood, burst pipes, etc. You may also get
protection against claims made by third parties
arising from these events.
s -EDICAL AND HEALTH INSURANCE TAKAFUL
which pays for various types of hospitalisation
and medical expenses that you may incur if you
become ill or injured. These include payments
for hospital room and board, professional fees,
medical supplies and medical services.
s 0ERSONAL ACCIDENT INSURANCE TAKAFUL which
pays a sum of money if you become disabled due
to an accident or if you die.
How do I know whether a takaful operator is
Shariah compliant?
Shariah Committees have been set up by all takaful
operators to ensure that their takaful operations are
in line with the Shariah. Bank Negara Malaysia has
also set up a Shariah Advisory Council which acts as a
reference point for matters relating to Islamic banking
and takaful in Malaysia.Insurance/ takaful principles
Your insurance and takaful products are subject to four
main principles which are observed universally, that is,
insurable interest/ permissible takaful interest, utmost
good faith, indemnity and contribution.
To get an insurance protection, you need to have an
insurable interest in the item or life to be insured.
Insurable interest is normally present by way of
relationship or ownership. For example, a person will
have insurable interest in his own or child’s life, house
or motor vehicle.
On the same basis, in takaful, you need to have
permissible takaful interest before you can join a
takaful scheme. An insurance/ takaful plan without
insurable interest/ permissible takaful interest is like
a gambling contract where the purpose of having
insurance/ takaful is to profit from it.
Utmost good faith means you need to state all the
material facts when you are buying a policy or joining a
takaful scheme. The purpose is to allow your insurance
company/ takaful operator to decide whether it should
provide the insurance or the takaful cover to you, and
the amount of premium or takaful contribution that it
should collect from you. If you do not observe this requirement, your insurance
policy/ takaful certificate can become invalid and your
insurance company/ takaful operator can refuse to pay
a claim made by you.
Indemnity and contribution only apply to insurance/
takaful taken on your belongings. When you incur a
loss, the rule of indemnity will only allow you to get
an amount that will return you to the position you
were in before the loss. Under the contribution rule,
all insurance companies/ takaful operators providing
cover to a property will share in the damages of the
said property. In this way, a person cannot “profit” by
having more than one policy or takaful plan on the
same item.Where can I get an insurance/ takaful plan?
You can get an insurance/ takaful plan:
s$IRECTLYFROMINSURANCECOMPANIESORTAKAFUL
operators respectively;
s 4HROUGHREGISTEREDAGENTS
lNANCIALADVISERSOR
licensed brokers; and
s 4HROUGHBANKINGINSTITUTIONSHAVINGBANCASSURANCE
arrangements with insurance companies or
bancatakaful arrangements with takaful operators,
respectively.
An insurance or takaful agent acts for an insurance
company or takaful operator and sells insurance
policies or takaful plans issued by the insurance
company or takaful operator only. An insurance or
takaful broker acts for the customer and advises
customer on the plan that he may need. A financial
adviser is an independent party that offers a variety of
financial planning services, including insurance/ takaful
to his customer. Shop around
It pays to shop around for a plan that meets your
needs. You can compare premiums, terms and details
of exactly what is covered in the plan and what is
excluded. Different policies may have different terms
and conditions, rates and exclusion clauses. Get an
explanation if you do not understand any term so that
you are fully aware of what you are getting into.Checklist: Getting an insurance/ takaful plan
Below is a checklist to guide you when getting an
insurance/ takaful plan:
s $EALWITHAPPROVEDPARTIESREGISTEREDAGENTS
licensed brokers or directly with an insurance
company or takaful operator.
s #OMPAREPREMIUMCONTRIBUTIONRATES'ET
quotations from several insurance companies/
takaful operators and/ or agents.
s #OMPAREBENElTS
TERMS
PRODUCTFEATURES

limitations and exclusions.
s -AKESUREYOUCANAFFORDTHEPREMIUMOR
contribution of the cover.
s (AVEENOUGHCOVER!VOIDGETTINGTOOMUCHORTOO
little cover.
s -AKESUREYOURAPPLICATIONFORMISFULLYCOMPLETED

information given is accurate and all material facts
are fully disclosed.
s 'OFORTHENECESSARYMEDICALCHECKUPREQUESTEDAS
soon as possible.
What is a material fact?
A material fact is any fact relating to you or the object to
be covered that the insurance company/ takaful operator
should know so that it can make a decision on whether it
should grant you the cover, the amount of premiums you
need to pay and the terms to be applied. The insurance
company/ takaful operator will normally get these facts
from the application form. As such, if you are not sure
of any questions in the application form, you should get
an explanation and not guess or leave the item blank. In
life insurance/ family takaful, facts commonly deemed
as material include occupation, financial status, family
medical history, state of health and lifestyle. Paying premium/ contribution
When you pay your premium/ contribution, make sure
that your cheque is issued to your insurance company/
takaful operator if you pay through an agent. Otherwise,
try to pay your premium directly to the insurance
company/ takaful operator. There are many ways you can
pay your premium/ contributions such as autodebit from
your bank account, via Internet banking, credit card and
using telephone banking.
You should ask for a receipt for the premiums/
contributions paid and contact your insurance company/
takaful operator if you have not received the policy within
one month after the purchase.What must I do if I have an insurance/ takaful
plan?
An insurance policy/ takaful certificate is a legal
document. As such, you need to observe the terms
of the policy/ certificate so that your plan can remain
effective. You should:
s 2EADTHEINSURANCEPOLICYTAKAFULCERTIlCATE
when you receive it. Sort out with your insurance
company/ takaful operator if things are not as
agreed earlier.
s5NDERSTANDYOURRIGHTSANDRESPONSIBILITIESASA
policyowner/ participant of a takaful plan.
s -ONITORTHEPERIODOFYOURINSURANCETAKAFULPLAN
and time for payment of premium/ contribution so
that there is no gap in your cover.
s.OTIFYYOURINSURANCECOMPANYTAKAFULOPERATOROF
any changes to any material facts.
s5PDATEYOURINSURANCECOMPANYTAKAFULOPERATOR
on your mailing address to receive all notices on
time.
s+EEPYOURPOLICYCERTIlCATEINASECUREPLACE
s.OTIFYYOURINSURANCECOMPANYTAKAFULOPERATORAS
soon as possible when there is a claim.
s4AKEACTIONTOPROTECTYOURASSETSFROMFURTHER
losses after your assets have been damaged, e.g. in
an accident, as such losses will not be covered by
your insurance/ takaful plan.Frequently asked questions
Q: What is the difference between insurance and
takaful?
A: Both insurance and takaful provide protection
against risks. However, takaful is an insurance
scheme based on Shariah where a person who joins
a scheme will undertake a contract (aqad) to agree
to help other members in the scheme when they
suffer a defined loss or mishap.
Q: How do I ensure that the person I deal with is
an authorised person to sell insurance or takaful
products?
A: Ask for the person’s authorisation to prove that if he
is properly registered or licensed to sell insurance/
takaful products. Note that:
s !LL INSURANCE AGENTS SELLING LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES
are registered with the Life Insurance Association
of Malaysia.
s !LL INSURANCE AGENTS SELLING GENERAL INSURANCE
policies are registered with Persatuan Insurans Am
Malaysia.
s !LL TAKAFUL AGENTS SELLING TAKAFUL PRODUCTS
ARE REGISTERED WITH THE 2EGISTRAR OF 4AKAFUL
Intermediaries.
s !LL lNANCIAL ADVISERS AND INSURANCE BROKERS ARE
licensed by Bank Negara Malaysia under the
Insurance Act 1996.
s !LL TAKAFUL BROKERS ARE LICENSED BY "ANK .EGARA
Malaysia under the Takaful Act 1984.Q: How do I know what a material fact is?
A: A material fact is any matter that is needed by
the insurance company/ takaful operator to make
a decision whether to accept your proposal for
insurance or takaful. Generally, the proposal form
used by the insurance company or takaful operator
would have been designed to gather the required
facts. You should correctly and accurately answer all
the questions in the proposal form. If you are not
certain, you should check with your insurance/ takaful
agent or insurance company/ takaful operator.Q: I have been paying my life insurance premiums/
family takaful contributions regularly through
MY INSURANCE TAKAFUL AGENT (OWEVER WHEN )
MADE A CLAIM RECENTLY MY INSURANCE COMPANY
takaful operator informed me that my policy
has lapsed as I did not pay the premiums/
contributions required. What should I do?
A: You should lodge an official complaint to your
insurance company/ takaful operator for its
investigation. Provide your insurance company/
takaful operator with all the documents on your case
including copies of receipts and name of the agent
involved. If you have the relevant documents, your
insurance company/ takaful operator will be liable for
the claim. However, if you do not have any document
or other proof, your insurance company/ takaful
operator may reject your claim.
To protect yourself, if you have an insurance/ takaful
plan, always ensure that your premiums/ contributions
are made payable to your insurance company/ takaful
operator. Follow up with your insurance company/
takaful operator for an official receipt upon payment
and file all letters including policy contract/ takaful
certificate and receipts properly. Glossary
Indemnity
Putting the policy holder to the same financial
position immediately before a loss by payment, repair or
replacement.
Insurable interest
A basic rule of insurance requiring the person buying
insurance to have an insurable interest in the subject
matter to be insured or life of the insured in that the
loss or damage to the subject matter or any misfortune
which occurs to the insured would result in a financial
loss to the policy holder. In takaful, this requirement is
called permissible takaful interest.
Material fact
Any matter that is relevant to the decision of the
insurance company/ takaful operator on whether to
accept the risk concerned and the rates and terms to
be applied.
Utmost good faith
A requirement on the person buying an insurance
or takaful product to state all relevant details in the
application form to the insurance company/ takaful
operator to allow the insurance company/ takaful
operator to consider his application fairly.Zillmerisation relates to the valuation of a life insurance company by an actuary.

When new regular premium protection business (such as life or critical illness insurance) is written, the value of the company may reduce (when viewed on a regulatory basis) even if the business is likely to be profitable. This effect is known as new business strain and is due to the requirement for the insurer to hold day 1 capital reserves that are higher than the initial premium payments from customers. Zillmerisation is one method of adjusting a net premium valuation to ease this initial strain.zillmerisation
Zillmerisation relates to the valuation of a life insurance company by an actuary. When new regular premium protection business (such as life or critical illness insurance) is written, the value of the company may reduce (when viewed on a regulatory basis) even if the business is likely to be profitable. This effect is known as new business strain

A method of calculating reserves in life insurance that allows for the acquisition costs incurred when a contract is written. Zillmerised reserves are lower than reserves that are not zillmerised. The method applies to regular premium business. It is effectively a variation of the net premium method, which increases the future premiums valued to ta...

All of the financial figures of the original paper have been reproduced in the translation. This has been achieved by substituting dollars for the Prussian taler. The units of Prussian currency at the time were as follows:

1 Taler
30 Silbergrosschen per Taler

12 Pfennig per Silbergrosschen


A single taler in 1861 was worth $.75 in U.S. currency. Reconstructions of the Consumer Price Index for that era show a CPI of 27 for 1861 where the CPI of 1967 is 100. All of the tables in the origina paper have been recalculated using the spreadsheet software Quattro. Except where indicated, the only differences between the recalculated values and the original values are due to rounding. 
 


  
  
 
Introduction 
 

More than any other corporations life insurance companies should be held to exact and strict accounting rules. The entry into a life insurance contract is an act of self denial and an example of the noblest love of spouse or child. Often the policy is the only inheritance and the total estate of widows and orphans. Since life insurance institutions draw in a considerable portion of the savings of thousands of policy holders on the basis of contracts several of which will not expire before a half or sometimes almost a whole century. Therefore, their solidity and solvency must be mathematically provable and indisputable.

These undeniably true words which were spoken by the New York State Insurance Commissioner when he withdrew the license of the American Mutual Life Insurance Company of New Haven, Connecticut, to do business in the State of New York. In honor of these words, in the following pages we will present several considerations about two different methods of calculating the reserves of life insurance institutions. 
 

In the year 1857, Mr. Wilhelm Lazarus , in a thorough article (See Rundschau der Versicherungen, 1857, p317.) had already called attention to the misleading principle of estimating the present value of obligations at a lower interest rate than the present value of the yet to be collected premiums and demonstrated the consequences of such misleading calculations on the balance sheet of a company which thus calculates. Yet since that time, practically nothing has happened to prevent the use of this misleading principle. Here and there, one finds in professional journals the remark that the reserve figured on gross premiums is too small, but that is all one finds. In more recent times, prompted by the publication of the balance sheets of some English companies, some voices have been raised against the mischief of these calculations. With this, other aspects of the life insurance business have been drawn into the conversation and, here and there, mistaken concepts have become widely shared. For example, it was asserted that the recent custom of paying agents a high commission for the acquisition of a life insurance contract, about 1 % of the insured amount, seems to make it impossible to set up an actuarially sound reserve. And thus companies that pay such commissions are forced to calculate reserves too low, if not even according to the principle of gross premiums. The presentation of such mistaken, when not intentionally misleading assertions, are well suited to deeply affect the trust of the public in life insurance companies and will harm exactly those companies that have published their business details with the greatest openness and make no secret of their commissions. We attempt to contribute, to the best of our ability, the correct view about the reserves of life insurance companies and in the first segment of the following monograph provide the proof that even for the custom of a closing commission, a reserve can be established that has a completely calculable magnitude. In the second segment, we will briefly discuss the method of calculation with gross premiums, and we believe that we thereby show that many phenomena existing in the real world are natural consequences of this misleading system. 
  
 


  
  


I.


In a life insurance institution, the reserve plays a large role. The annual premium for an insurance policy [in this we have in mind the usual whole life insurance policy with annual premium payment] remains constant for the whole term of the insurance policy while the risk that the insured amount becomes due by the death of the insured grows with each year. And if an insurance policy were always issued for one year only, it would require an increase in premium each year. Therefore a premium that remains constant for the whole term of the insurance policy is greater for the first year after the issue of the insurance policy than the yearly renewable term (YRT) premium; later the premium is smaller than the YRT premium. If a certain number of persons enter an insurance bank, then the bank will create a considerable surplus after covering the occurring cases of death among those persons. And in the later years this surplus has to cover the added expenditures when the bank must pay more for cases of death than it receives in premiums. For example, the attached Table II shows that a bank which insures a number of 30 year old persons with a sum of $500,000, collects more in premium during the first 25 years than it has to pay out for cases of death. From the 26th year on, the expenses for deaths overtake the premium income. For example, in the 40th year, the excess of the death claims over the premiums is $8,679. 
 

Therefore as the compelling consequence of the level premium method, a life insurance bank must set up a reserve fund. In each case, the amount of the reserve fund cannot be arbitrarily set as it suits the bank, but it has to be mathematically and precisely determined, just as the annual premium is calculated mathematically and precisely on the basis of a mortality table and a certain rate of interest. For example, the insurance bank may not lower the reserve fund, speculating that the mortality among the insured will be more advantageous than could be expected from the mortality table used in the calculation of the premium or that it will, in consequence of fortunate speculations, obtain a higher interest income with their monies and thus be easily able to cover the shortage in the reserve funds. The reserve fund must be set up much more from the paid in premiums of the existing insurance policies and the calculable interest after deduction of the same calculable future expenses for death, and to be sure the calculable expenses, not the actually caused ones for otherwise a sustained excess mortality among the insureds could, if not exhaust the reserve fund, at least significantly lower it below the level required for the future performance of the bank. The reserve fund is not to be set up from the premiums paid by the insured but from the net premiums. The premiums arrived at by exact calculation (net premiums) are to be increased by a loading which should reimburse the bank for business expenses and the risk that mortality among the insureds exceeds the expected limits. The loading, the size of which will be established in the individual banks according to more or less arbitrary rules of thumb, goes to the bank, and the reserve fund is calculated from the remaining net premiums after the deduction of this loading. As soon as the net premium described above is determined, the reserve will result as a mathematical consequence at every point of time during the term of the insurance policy. 
 

As a rule the net premium is so established that it remains constant for the whole term of the insurance policy, just as the loaded premium paid by the insured remains constant. But clearly there is no reason not to include other considerations relating to the amount of net premium if only these are rationally calculated, completely covering the obligations of the bank. There are insurance policies with rising or falling premium payments whereby naturally not only the loaded premium changes in the different periods during the term of the insurance policy, but also the net premium. 
 

To arrive at that firmly established net premium that we believe we must prefer in general and prefer especially in the current situation in the business, we put forward several considerations:

The participation of the German public in life insurance has increased in a gratifying fashion in recent years. Not only do some of the few older German companies do more significant business than in earlier decades, but also the newer German companies and besides them a considerable number of foreign companies work with generally growing success. The Germania has even experienced such a spectacular participation by the public that last year (1862) it issued insurance contracts in a sum of significantly more than $6 million and in the month April of this year alone, in a sum of more than $1 million. This glorious upswing in the life insurance business is not only the consequence of the correct appreciation and high significance which life insurance has from the individual, the family, and the state and which is permeating all levels of society, but this upswing is also brought about by the efforts of the executives of the life insurance companies and their agents. These executives introduced the practice of paying the agent a higher commission at the issue of the insurance policy [previously the agent had only received a commission which remained constant for the term of the insurance policy. The agent kept a portion of the premiums he collected and thus achieved for himself a worthwhile income only after years and years]. This succeeded in attracting active business men as agents who then, being placed in a position to quit their other business, were able to use their whole strength for the attraction of new insurance policies. The success, that the introduction of this commission practice has had until now is its own best justification. But complaints against the commission method force another question: how does a company defray the agency costs which must grow proportionately for a large scale addition of new insurance policies. We admit that if a company is required not only to post an actuarially sound reserve [naturally this must be required] but if it is also required to set the amount of the reserve on the basis of the determined, prescribed, or traditional calculation model (net level premium ), then company can thereby run into difficulties. The expenses of an insurance policy, for the coverable mortality for the first year and for the reserve set aside at the end of the first year according to any one calculation model can and must under all circumstances be greater than the premium income for this insurance policy. The thus growing deficit will naturally be the greater, the greater the increase in new insurance policies is, and when the increase is sufficiently large, the deficit too will become so large that even a company with significant means could run into difficulties. It should be clear even to the lay person that a contradiction emerges here. On the one hand, one wishes ample increases in new insurance policies; on the other hand, one would be financially embarrassed by this and this could happen even [as will be demonstrated in the following] with commission rates that have not been set too high.

It would be wonderful if a solution for this could not only be found but if it offered itself, and this is really the case. The obvious thought is that under the old, usual method of calculation which at the close of an insurance policy posts the costs growing out of that closing, possibly in a prepaid commission account, and this account is entered as an asset of the bank. The sums brought into this account in an individual year would then have to be amortized in a certain number of years, or what would be preferable is that from the total amount of the prepaid commission each year a certain and adequate portion of the premium income would be written off. This model was publicly discussed on April 26 of this year in an article in the German insurance paper of Breslau, but for various reasons we cannot sanction this. For one, there is no measure and no limit for the amount of those costs that could be placed in this prepaid commission account. In essence this account would have the effect of lessening the base capital or paid in the reserve; and then it would certainly be possible to endanger the stability of the company through excessive expenses for the acquisition of new insurance policies. Second, the artificial asset of prepaid commissions should really be gradually amortized. Since this requires a relatively high fraction of the annual premium, this means that the coverage of the other costs and the gain for a long series of years, respectively, are unnecessarily lowered. Finally, thirdly, there could and would be found, in the account of the prepaid commissions, sums prepaid for such insurance policies that have lapsed. Later insureds then have to pay subsequently the costs which have been incurred by earlier insureds.

In the following simple way one develops a model which is completely untouched by these disadvantages. One calculates the net premium for an insurance policy in such a way that in the first year it is smaller by a certain amount than for the following years. We omit the development of the necessary formula here. It is, by the way, extremely simple. We get our net premium as the usual premium which remains constant for the whole term of the insurance policy. Take the amount by which the first annual premium should be smaller and divide it by an annuity due for the issue age and add it to the usual net premium. 

  
 
I = the amount of closing costs to be amortized

per $100 of insurance
Px = the net annual premium for $100 of insurance
ax = the first net annual premium

= Px + I / äx - I
ßx = the second and subsequent net annual premium

= Px + I / äx

For example, calculating with 3 1/2 percent interest and using the Combined Experience Table, the net annual premium at issue age 40 for an endowment for $100 at age 90 [and in the following, this is what we always have in mind] is 2.484 percent. Should the first annual premium be smaller by 1 percent of the insured sum, then we get as the premium for the following years 2.484 + 1 divided by the annuity due at age 40 which ends at 90, that is, 2.484 + 0.059 and this as premium for the first year 2.543 - 1. = 1.543. In contrast, if the first premium should be smaller by 1 1/4 percent of the insured sum, then the first premium is 2.484 + 5/4 * 0.059 - 1.25 = 1.308 and the premium for all the following years is 2.484 + 5/4 * 0.059 = 2.558. 
 

Naturally also the insured pays the same premium in the first year which he will have to remit in the following years, and the bank covers the cost arising from acquisition of the insurance policy with the portion of the premium available to it in the first year. The reserve will be calculated just as with the usual premium, that is, one finds the reserve for an insurance policy which has been in existence for a number of years by deducting from the net single premium at the attained age the product of 

  
 
tVx = the net level premium reserve at age x

= Ax+t - Px äx+t
Ax+t = the net single premium at age x+t
tVx' = the Zillmer reserve at age x+t

= Ax+t - ß äx+t
While the formulas are developed prospectively, Zillmer's reserve calculations are actually done retrospectively as was common in the 19th century. 

  
 
the net annual premium and an annuity due at the higher age. The reserve will be somewhat smaller here than according to the previous method, but exactly fulfills the demands:

that it is formed from the net premiums, after one takes deductions of the calculable expenses for death, and with the addition of the calculable interest, or
in other words, that the reserves in union with the premium to be paid by the insured in the future and, that is of course, with the net premiums, completely covered the obligations of the company. Since the reserves are somewhat smaller than according to the old (net level premium) method, the net premiums are by a small, but corresponding, part higher.
Before we enter into further considerations of the reserve, we want to say something more about the first year premium. For this premium, for each issue age, there exists a minimum, and this is given by the premium for one year of term insurance. If the premium for the first year were much smaller than the corresponding premium for one year of term insurance, then the mortality of the first year would not be completely covered by the premium, and the insurance company would have to cover the excess mortality out of other means which under circumstances could become not only uncomfortable, but even dangerous. Insofar as the minimum first year premium is given by the premium for one year of term insurance, the maximum of the difference between the premium for subsequent years and the premium for the first year is given at the same time for every age. If we call this difference X, then obviously the usual premium increased by X divided by the annuity due at the issue age must be just as large as the premium for one year of term insurance increased by X. 
Px + X / äx >= Ax:1 + X
Solving for X gives

X <= ( Px - Ax:1 ) äx / ( äx - 1)

 
If we solve the resulting equation, we find X, that is, the maximum of the costs that may be incurred at the closing of an insurance policy equal to the difference between the usual net premium and the premium for one year of term insurance, this difference multiplied by the annuity due at the issue age and divided by the annuity due lessened by one or immediate annuity at the same issue age.

The formula for the maximum of the closing costs can be expressed in many ways. So this maximum, for example, is equal to the quotient of the annuity due at the issue age lessened by one and the annuity of the next higher age lessened by one, that is, for the insurance sum one, or it is equal to the difference of the usual net premium at a one year higher age and the usual net premium of the issue age multiplied by the annuity due at the issue age or, and this is the simplest expression, the maximum of the closing costs is equal to the net premium for the one year higher age lessened by the premium of the issue age for a one year term insurance policy. This simple form for the maximum of the closing costs can also be directly deduced. The maximum that the company can spend for the acquisition of an insurance policy is evidently reached when at the end of the first year, the reserve is zero. The latter is the case if we take as net premium the usual net premium of the next higher age. Since the premium for the one year term insurance policy is used to cover mortality, there remains for the coverage of costs caused by closing at most the difference between the usual net premium of the next higher age and the premium for the one year term insurance policy. 
 

The following table shows the maximal rates for the closing costs if one calculates according to the Combined Experience Table and 3 1/2 percent interest. 
  
  
  
 
Issue 	Maximum Rate of Closing Cost 	Maximum Rate of Closing Cost 
Age x	Percent of Insured Sum	Percent of Premium
10	0.48 	42.4% 
15	0.59 	46.7%
20	0.71 	50.1%
25	0.86 	53.3%
30	1.04 	56.0%
35	1.27 	58.5%
40	1.58	61.1%
45	1.95 	62.3%
50	2.33 	60.2%
55	2.77 	57.0%
60	3.28 	52.8%
65	3.80 	47.2%
Maximum Closing Costs = Px+1 - Ax:1
Maximum Closing Costs as a Percent of Premium

= (Px+1 - Ax:1 ) / Px+1

  
 
It follows from this table that if the average issue age is 37 years or a little more, closing costs of a little more than 1 3/8 percent of the insured sum can be applied; if we take into consideration that the maximum rate for higher ages grows in an increasing relationship and that furthermore the younger issue ages purchase smaller sums of insurance, then we may assert that an insurance company which figures according to the Combined Experience Table and an interest rate of 3 1/2 percent can establish 1 1/2 percent of the insured sum as the average maximum that it may spend for the acquisition of an insurance policy and that it may cover by a corresponding calculable portion of the net premium. 
 

It does not follow from this that 1 1/2 percent of the insured sum has to be figured as the closing cost; on the contrary, I hold it advisable to stay with 1 percent or 1 1/4 percent of the insured sum. It is possible for the average issue age to decrease if younger persons participate in insurance in greater numbers or if younger persons insure themselves with larger amounts than the present experience has shown. Then it is possible for the results of the calculation to develop so that the average issue age decreases and the calculable rate of closing costs has become too high. 
 

Since even in the case where we calculate the closing costs with only 1 - 1 1/4 percent of the insured sum, with high probability but not with absolute certainty we are secured against the danger that could emerge from a decline in the average issue age; therefore I consider a precautionary measure necessary which will be discussed in the following:

If we figure as closing costs more than the maximum rate for the youngest issue age, then at the younger ages the net premium to be used for the first year for the risk is smaller than the premium for a one year term insurance policy at the issue age or, in other words, the reserve at the end of the first insurance year becomes negative and because of this the net premium to be used in following years would be greater than the usual net premium for an issue age one year higher. If the company includes the negative reserve for a younger age in the total sum of the reserves this lowers the total reserves exactly by as much as the company has too little for the calculable mortality in the course of the year [of course, drawing interest until the end of the year]. The higher the closing costs are calculated, the greater will be the amount of the negative reserves and by so much more would the total sum of the reserves be forced down thereby. Add to this the fact that the cost must be written off against the company's capital for those insurance policies which lapse after a 1 year existence. In consideration of these circumstances, I hold it essential that a company does not include the negative reserves in the total reserves, but calculates the reserve for the end of the year as zero. From this grows for the company an expense which exceeds the calculable expense allowance. But this is easy to handle, as will be demonstrated, so long as we can assume that the calculable closing costs have not been set too high. If the conditions change so that it appears that the closing costs calculated up to now have been set too high, this will become evident when the portion of income that would be used for the formation of the profit is reduced while the premium reserve remains untouched and the company has, at the same time, a built in regulator for the magnitude of the closing costs.

The insurance polices that had a negative reserve at the end of the first year are increasing more in the second year because of the consideration of the calculable closing costs. If at the end of the second year, the reserve should still be negative then instead of the negative value again we set the reserve to zero and pay the calculable reserve only at the end of the third year. This last happened only with the very lowest issue ages as the following table shows: 
  
  
  
 
Issue		Net Level Premium Reserves	
Age x		for a Policy for $100	
Durations 
1	2	3
15	0.584 	1.187 	1.809 
16	0.606 	1.232 	1.878
17	0.630 	1.279 	1.949

  
 
Zillmer Reserves @ 1 1/4 % Closing Costs	
for a Policy for $100	
Durations 
1	2	3
15	-0.659 	-0.049	0.581 
16	-0.636 	-0.002 	0.651 
17	0.612 	0.045 	0.723
tVx' = tVx - I (1 - tVx)


  
 
In general, the expense that the bank incurs by not setting up the actual negative reserves but setting them to zero, that is, for some of the insurance policies the reserves are calculated as greater than they actually are, is not significant. If we calculate on the basis of 1 1/4 percent closing cost, the reserves will already be positive at the end of the first year for an issue age of 35 years; if we calculate on the basis of 1 percent, the reserves will already be positive for the issue age of 30. In general, the younger ages are covered with less insurance the lower the age so that where the closing expense for the individual insurance policy becomes somewhat larger, then there are only individual insurance policies that cause this expense. Add to this that in a steadily growing business, this expense is to be paid only in the first year. The net premium for the second year has to cover the mortality of that year and the negative reserve for the end of the first year and beyond that provide the positive reserve for the end of the second year. Since the negative reserve has already been defrayed by the bank, this portion of the net premium flows towards its profit or rather this portion defrays the negative reserves for the new insurance policies. In a business that grows at an increasing rate, the expense would repeat itself every year, and the increase would be the difference by which the insurance policies for the younger ages have grown more than in the previous year. To have grasp of the size of these costs we will make the specific and certainly not too low assumption that in a year bank insures

$10,000 for 20 year old persons 
$20,000 for 21 year old persons 
$30,000 for 22 year old persons 
... 
$100,000 for 29 year old persons 
$120,000 for 30 year old persons 
$140,000 for 31 year old persons 
... 
$200,000 for 34 year old persons. 
 
Then if we calculate closing costs as 1 percent of the insured amounts, we would have 
  
  
 
Negative Reserve 
Issue Age	Insured Sum	as Percent Insured Sum	in Total
20 
$10,000 
-0.289 
-28.9 
21 
$20,000 
-0.263 
-52.5 
22 
$30,000 
-0.234 
-70.3 
23 
$40,000 
-0.205 
-82.2 
24 
$50,000 
-0.175 
-87.5 
25 
$60,000 
-0.143 
-85.8 
26 
$70,000 
-0.110 
-77.1 
27 
$80,000 
-0.075 
-60.4 
28 
$90,000 
-0.040 
-35.9 
29 
$100,000 
-0.002 
-2.2 
Sum 
$550,000 
 
-582.8 
Col. 3 = Reserve Factor without sign
tVx' = tVx - I (1 - tVx)
Col. 4 = Col. 3 * Col. 2
If we calculate closing costs as 1 1/4 percent of the insured amount 
  
  
  
  
 
1 1/4 % Closing Cost 
Negative Reserve 
Issue Age	Insured Sum	As Percent Insured Amount	In Total
20 
$10,000 
-0.538 
-53.8 
21 
$20,000 
-0.511 
-102.1 
22 
$30,000 
-0.482 
-144.7 
23 
$40,000 
-0.453 
-181.4 
24 
$50,000 
-0.423 
-211.5 
25 
$50,000 
-0.391 
-234.5 
26 
$60,000 
-0.358 
-250.6 
27 
$70,000 
-0.323 
-258.6 
28 
$80,000 
-0.288 
-258.8 
29 
$90,000 
-0.250 
-249.7 
30 
$100,000 
-0.211 
-253.0 
31 
$120,000 
-0.170 
-237.4 
32 
$140,000 
-0.127 
-203.1 
33 
$160,000 
-0.082 
-147.0 
34 
$180,000 
-0.033 
-66.8 
Sum 
$1,350,000 
 
-2853.0 

 

If a company in every year issues $550,000 more insurance inforce than in the preceding year for the issue ages under 30, then it would have, at 1 percent closing costs, an expenditure that exceeds the calculable only by $586, that is, this expenditure does not even amount to 1/4 percent of the premium income as soon as the premium income has climbed over $250,000, or if the company figures on 1 1/4 percent closing costs, it would have an annual expenditure of $2,870 when in every year it issues policies for $1,350,000 more than in the previous year for the issue ages under 35, thus less than 1 percent of the premium income when this has exceeded $300,000. 
 

One could say that the company can figure the maximum rates for closing costs for every age, the total reserve of the new insurance policy would then amount to exactly zero, and the net premium of each individual issue age would then become equal to the usual net premium of the next higher age. If a company calculates its premiums from the start so that it every time adds a certain percentile loading, then the premiums for the higher issue ages would become very expensive [besides this for safety it would have to make the size of the commissions for the agents likewise dependable on the issue age which as already mentioned could lead to all sorts of difficulties]. The following table shows the various percentage rates which would remain for the bank from the loaded premium when the loaded premium is calculated in the usual method according to the Combined Experience Mortality Table and 3 1/2 percent interest and a loading of 12 1/2 percent. According to the usual method, the company would lose a ninth part or 11 1/9 percent of the premiums. 
 
For Administrative Cost Stated as a Percent of the Loaded Premium, if the First Year Premium Is Reduced by: 
Issue Age	Max Rate	1 % Insured Sum	1 1/4 % Insured Sum
20 
8.94% 
8.04% 
7.28% 
30 
8.46% 
8.55% 
7.91% 
40 
7.80% 
9.01% 
8.49% 
50 
7.14% 
9.41% 
8.99% 
60 
6.53% 
9.71% 
9.36% 
Remainder = ( Gx - I - Ax:1 ) / Gx
This formula does not work for the second and third columns.

Additionally this table shows that the agency commissions which according to the earlier method were measured according to a determined percentage rate of the premium, according to the new method could be easily so determined that it becomes more advantageous for the company. After a significant commission in the first year after the closing of the insurance policy the agent will be readily satisfied with a smaller commission for the later years. If, for example, earlier a company paid as agents commission 6 percent of the premium, it would have only 5 1/9 percent for the other administrative costs. Now, if besides the closing commission it pays only 2 to 3 percent premium commission, there remains for it for most issue ages more than 5 1/9 percent. 
 

As it concerns the reserve for an insurance policy that has existed for a number of years, the reserve would be somewhat less than according to the previous method. The difference between the two reserves will become smaller each year. As can easily be proved with the help of mathematical symbols, when the calculable rate of the closing commissions is equal to "a" percent of the insured amount, then the difference in the reserves is "a" percent of the insured sum lessened by "a" percent of the reserve calculated according to the old method. 
tVx - tVx' = I ( 1 - tVx )

Since the reserve gets bigger every year, the difference will become less with every year. For example, if the old reserve for an insurance policy of $100 has the value of:

$25.00 then the new reserve with 1 % closing costs is $24.25
$50.00 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, $49.50
$75.00 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, $74.75
$100.00 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, , $100.00

 
The total reserve of an insurance bank for all insurance policies whose reserves are calculated according to the new principle has likewise a smaller value than if it were calculated according to the old method because each individual reserve is smaller. The difference will be relatively greater where the greatest number of insurance policies have not existed for very long. The difference here is also "a" percent of the insured sum lessened by "a" percent of the reserve calculated according to the old method when "a" percent of the insured sum was calculated as closing costs. For example, at the end of the year 1861, the Bank of Gotha had insurance inforce of $38,800,000 and a premium reserve of about $8,700,000. If the Bank of Gotha had figured from the beginning 1 percent closing costs, its reserves would be about: ($388,000 - $87,000) that is, $301,000 smaller. 
 
Table I (attached) follows the reserve for an insurance policy of $100 for the issue ages of 30,40,and 50 through the whole term of the insurance policy. We see that the reserves with calculation of closing costs grow faster than the old reserves as it must be since from the second policy year on there is a higher, calculated net premium. The Tables II, III, and IV each follow a company of persons of the same age that insure themselves at the same time, and Table V gives a picture of the results achieved by an insurance bank when it reinsures every year such cohorts as are followed individually in Tables II, III, and IV. It shows that after a sequence of 60 years, with an insurance inforce of about $41,900,000, the old reserve would have grown to $12,644,900. The reserve with 1 percent closing costs would have grown to $12,352,000, and the reserve with 1 1/4 percent closing costs would have grown to $12,279,100. The difference between the old and the new reserve is, according to the above, with 1 percent closing costs $419,102 - $126,449 = $292,653 with 1 1/4 percent closing costs $419,102 - $126,449) * 5/4 = $365,817. 
 

With the assumptions of Table V, a stationary state comes after 60 years, that is, as the consequence of annual cases of death, respectively, expirations of insurance policies, the same sum comes due which is annually newly insured. Therefore, in the future the insurance inforce, premium income, and reserve remain constant as long as the assumptions are met. In such a state, obviously, the net premiums and the calculable interest on those premiums and on the reserve capital must be as great as the annually payable insurance sum. From the existing insurance inforce after 60 years come:

$16,947,500 to members that join at age 30 
$20,055,100 to members that join at age 40 
$ 4,907,600 to members that join at age 50 
  
 

If we now add to these values the expected premium and interest income sums and calculate premium incomes as follows: 
  
  
  
 
Net Premium if the First Year's Premium is Reduced by
Issue Age	
0 %
1 %
1 1/4 %
30
1.7973 
1.8490 
1.8620 
40
2.4841 
2.5428 
2.5575 
50
3.7083 
3.7792
3.7969 
ßx = Px + I / äx

We get the following income schedule which should cover the operations of the bank: 
1) when the reserve is calculated without closing costs

Net Premium $1,021,661 
3 1/2 percent interest thereon 35,758 
3 1/2 percent interest on reserve 442,547 
___________ 
Total $1,499,966 
 
2) if the reserve is calculated with 1 percent closing costs
Net Premium (after deduction of $15,000) $1,031,547 
3 1/2 percent interest thereon 36,104 
3 1/2 percent interest on the reserve 432,327 
----------- 
Total $1,499,978
3) if the reserve is calculated with 1 1/4 percent closing costs
Net Premium (after deduction of $18,750) $1,034,019 
3 1/2 percent interest thereon 36,190 
3 1/2 percent interest on the reserve 429,768 
------------ 
Total $1,499,977
The small differences of $34, $22, and $23 respectively against the required sum of $1,500,000 have their origin only in the round off that the numbers in Table V were subjected to (this is an alternative proof of the adequateness of the various reserves).
The above demonstrates clearly that a reserve calculated with a rate of closing costs that is not too high is completely sufficient for the solvency of the bank if the insurance polices exist until their normal end. If an insured allows his insurance to lapse while he is still alive, then this would not be awkward for the bank especially when it has used the precautionary rule that the negative reserves at the younger issue ages are not put up with the calculable amount but with the amount of zero, and when the agent does not receive a corresponding portion of the closing commissions or must pay out respectively in the case where the insurance lapses during the first year of its existence. On the contrary the collective reserves on such insurance policies go to the bank and flow to its profits. If at lapsing the insurance has been in existence long enough so that the insured can demand a buy back price, only the lower reserve can come into the calculations. As far as we know a bank is (not)obliged in such a case to pay the whole reserve, only a certain portion of the reserve. If a company, for example, customarily pays 3/4 of the reserve, then it can pay back just as much as when the reserve was calculated without closing costs as soon as the reserve has grown, for a $100 insured sum with 1 percent closing costs, to over $3 and, with 1 1/4 percent closing costs, to over $3 3/4 or, when the reserve without closing costs, had grown to $4 or $5, respectively, and it can pay back better since it has already paid itself for all closing costs.

II

Mr. Wilhelm Lazarus in the above mentioned paper "The Security of Life Insurance Institutions" (Rundschau der Versicherungen, 1857, p.317) called attention to it, noting that in the closing of the books of the Gresham Life Insurance Society on 12 November 1855, the liabilities of the society toward its insureds, even though it had been in existence for 7 years already, were valued lower than the value of premiums yet to be collected and yet a significant sum of the premiums to be used for the coverage of obligations had already been collected. A similar relationship shows itself in the balance sheet of the Great Britain published some time ago. After an almost 20 year existence, instead of a reserve, the Great Britain had as an asset the value of future premium income 529,469 pounds and as a liability the present value of the insured sum 494,707 pounds. Not only is there no reserve on hand, but the company figures for itself a net worth or profit of 34,762 pounds or $231,700 which sum is the present value of what the company will collect in excess of what it expects to pay at the close of 
Note: 34,762 pounds is 231,700 talers. This is 6 2/3 talers per pound. The exchange rate to U.S. dollars at this time was 5 dollars per pound. Thus the exchange rate was 1 1/3 taler per dollar or $.75 for a taler. 

 
the existing insurance policies. It is known that in the calculation of the net premium, the obligations of the insured are equalized with the obligations of the bank. If we continue on to the reserve calculation with net premium, then under special circumstances, as was shown in the first segment, the reserve of a portion of the insurance policies flowing out of the current year can become negative in calculation but this negative amount is of little significance as opposed to the reserves of all the insurance policies of that year and disappearing as opposed to the total reserves of all insurance policies from various years. It is then impossible, using calculations with net premiums, for the reserve to work out in the way it did with the Great Britain; and, in practice, a significant number of English companies calculate their reserves so that the premiums to be paid in the future by the insureds are calculated not according to the net premiums but according to a much higher premium and as a rule according to the loaded premium while the obligations of the company are valued according to the net premiums. As a consequence of this calculation, the reserve does not meet the demand that it be formed out of portion of the premium demanded for the risk after a one-time deduction of expenses covering calculable mortality and the addition of calculable interest. This method of calculating the reserves is clearly misleading. Apparently it is calculated according to the same principles as in the calculation with net premiums. One deducts from the value of the insured sum [the net single premium for insurance] the value of the premiums to be collected in the future, only instead of the net premium one takes the gross premiums. Herein lies the mistake. This principle for the calculation of reserves is generally only correct [even if it can be directly deduced] because and so far as it is a reformulation of the other principle according to which the reserve consists of the portion of the net premium not used up for mortality and the duly collected interest. If a company would enjoy a growing advantage out of closed insurance policy as soon as possible, then there is only the following way to sanction this procedure. So long as the loaded premium paid by an insured is higher than the net premium of that age into which the insured is gradually moving, the company figures as net premium the premium for one year term insurance, the excess of the loaded premium over the one year term premium it figures as profit. Once the insured has reached that age for which as issue age the net premium of the whole life insurance equals that premium which the insured pays, the whole life premium is charged. During the first (5 to 7) years when this forms absolutely no reserve, and only later would the company have a portion of the premium for reserve. Even with this model which borders on the imaginable, there is no talk about negative reserves. This is a new proof that this method of the English companies for calculating reserves with gross premiums is misleading. 
 

The just described way of enjoying the advantage from an insurance policy as quickly as possible is surpassed by the method using gross premiums. Here in the moment of the closing of an insurance policy, a profit appears for as many percent of the total value of the future premium payments as the percentage loading included in the premiums, or since the value of the future premium payments measured according to net premiums is equal to the net single premium for the insurance there is a profit in the amount of just as much a percent of the net premium, as the loaded premium is higher than the net premium; for example, if a company figures according to the Combined Experience Table with an interest rate of 4 1/2 percent [in many cases, a higher interest rate is figured and the thus reduced net premiums are loaded on this much more] and 30 percent load of the net premiums, at the moment of the closing of the insurance policy the profit amounts to: 
  
  
  
 
Issue Age 
Profit as Percent of Insured Sum 
20
6.63% 
30
8.16% 
37
9.60% 
40
10.34%
50
13.38% 
60
17.02%
(.30 ) Ax / 100 
If such a company in a year closes insurance policies in the amount of $5,000,000 [on the average issue age 37] , in so doing it figures for itself a profit of not less than $480,000, that is,

  
$5,000,000 * 9.60%.

Therefore the first method cannot be sanctioned because nothing remains for the company to take care of business expenses if the net premium to be calculated for obligations of the bank [reserve and mortality] during the term of the contract reaches the magnitude of the loaded premium . If the company has significant stock capital, it can cover those costs with the interest on this capital when the business expansion is small. If the expansion of the business exceeds a certain limit then the interest on even the most significant capital will not be sufficient. One cannot sanction a model which, with the expansion of the business, does not offer growing means for the coverage of business costs -- with traditionally figuring banks, the means for the coverage of business costs and beyond that for the formation of profits, increase first in a determined relationship to premium income and then in a certain relationship to premium reserve in that the interest realized above the regular percentage rate [and this will probably not be higher than 3 1/2 percent in solid companies] flow not to the reserve but to the administrative accounts, respectively, the profit. This last income as a rule is completely missing in the irrationally figuring companies because usually they have a calculated interest rate that is so high that the actual interest on the reserve capital is actually much lower than that required by calculation. 
 

The method of reserve calculation form the gross premiums suffers from the same problem, that it leaves nothing left for coverage of administrative costs from the premiums that will come in the future. It brings with it several disadvantages, that bring with them a soon and sure ruin of the company. 
 

First we will compare the magnitude of the reserves that have been calculated according to the method of gross premiums with the magnitude of rationally calculated reserves. Table I shows in its fourth column the reserve for issue ages 30, 40, and 50 on the basis of a premium provided with an interest rate of 4 1/2 percent and a loading of 30 percent. The table shows that in the first 5 to 7 years, the reserve is negative. Later the reserve achieves a positive value and when the insurance policy continues until its end, the reserve finally grows to the full amount of the insurance sum. Table II shows in its seventh column the reserves which the bank puts up for the number of persons who at issue time had been 30 years old and insured altogether for $500,000 when the appropriate insurance policies are followed up to the natural end. Likewise Table III and IV show similar results for people who at issue age are 40 respectively 50 years old. Columns 8 and 9 in Tables II through IV also demonstrate the asset and liability postings that are so beloved in the English accounting. The difference of the numbers from columns 8 and 9 give the reserves under column 7. Table V contains the summary of the three preceding tables. When we add numbers of the individual columns from the top down, we get those results that an insurance company achieves when it insures such groups of insurance policies each year. The row sums combined out of the 3 tables gives then the numbers for Table V. The premium rates [Column 3] that were the basis for the premium income are the premiums of 4 1/2 percent raised by 30 percent. The columns 8 and 9 were omitted but they could be developed by the addition of the 3 Tables II to IV.

Table V shows that the total reserve becomes positive only in the 13th year, and that finally after 60 years, where under the assumed circumstances, likewise takes place a stationary condition, the reserve is about $4,000,000 smaller than the reserve found by rational calculation in columns 4, 5, and 6. This difference amounts to about 10 percent of the insurance sum, more than 30 percent of the rational reserve, and about 350 percent of the premium income. These relationships become even more colossal if we presume a steadily growing business as it happens in Table IV. Here after 30 years the difference between the reserves from the gross premium and the rationally calculated reserve already amounts to about $9,000,000, that is, more than 50 percent of the rational reserve. 
 

To examine further what influence the calculation with gross premiums has on the development of the business, we will first assume that no insurance policy expires before its regular end. If the company does fora longer time equal business then, and this is certainly an unnatural phenomenon, the profit lessens from year to year. If, for example, we use the numbers of Table V and assume the existence of a fund from which the company can withdraw the artificially calculated profit for as long as the actually collected premium moneys do not reach so far and if we further assume that all funds draw interest at 4 1/2 percent, and if we calculate agency commissions as 1/2 of the first annual premium and only 1 percent of all later premiums and as administrative costs annually $20,000 multiplied by .1 percent of the insurance sum, the company will achieve profits as they are put together in the following table: 
 
Business Year
Profit
Premium Income
Profit as a Percent of Premium Income
1
$120,000 
$43,800
274%
5
$111,400
$213,900
52%
10
$101,700
$413,800
25%
15
$92,200
$597,300
15%
20
$83,400
$760,700
11%
30
$67,600
$1,012,400
7%
60
$50,500
$1,209,500
4%
(table from page 28)

Profit therefore decreases by about 58 percent in the course of time since with an equal or even business, the profit becomes less each year. It is a necessary consequence that the whole profit that a policy can bring with regular existence will be used up in the year of the end of the insurance policy. If the business continues in the same way, there would result year after year the same profit if the business expense remains the same. But these business expenses grow with the expansion of the business; therefore the profit must decline. Conversely, if a company wants to achieve equal profits in each following year, it must do more and more business so that the profit will not sink under a certain percent of the premium income [In the last case, the profit from a certain point in time on would have to grow proportionately to the premium income]. 
 

This appearance which characterizes the whole system as unhealthy emerges even without lapses. But what happens when a large part of the insurance policies lapse time and again? Then here emerges the main problem of this system. The lapsing of insurance policies occurs, to a large extent, in insurance policies that are not very old yet, where as a rule the reserve is still negative. With the lapsing of such an insurance policy, the negative reserve, respectively, the excessive asset posting disappear; the company now must cover this disappearance by new insurance policies which bring with them negative reserves and only with growth beyond that comes the attainment of the annual profit. Since with growing expansion, the number of lapsing insurance policies also grows then the business has to grow faster and faster. Since the accomplishment of this demand requires superhuman efforts, the sad consequences of this unhealthy system are very soon demonstrated here too. Even with the calculation with gross premiums according to which the reserve, the debt of the bank to its insureds, is established so small in the balance sheet even sometimes conversely as a debt of the insured, the companies very soon get into difficulties because the expansion is not increasing sufficiently [the losses in interest income because of the too high assumed interest rate are not even calculated here]. To figure out the proper profit, the to cover the no longer manageable deficit, the companies are forced to extrapolate all kinds of doubtful postings in accruals, and it is very difficult for the public to judge their value. When this manuever finally will not work any more, one attempts to get rid of the whole business by ceding it to another company. It would hardly seem possible that a company would get rid of a business in such a sickly state; but the experience shows that every year in England so and so many amalgamations and business transfers occur. How a company can feel motivated to take over such an unhealthy business cannot even be conceived in a German imagination. Such companies can only speculate that in the next years the premium income will exceed the expenditures for mortality and that they could in some one form calculate the excess part of the premium income as gain. When it finally will not go any farther, the business collapses; it does no harm when the many insureds remain unsatisfied. The executives of the business and their shareholders, these too have enjoyed their benefits. Nothing keeps them from establishing a new business under some other name. A fraternal burial society which is arranged as badly as possible, which collects contributions according to the principle of the present need, is to be preferred to such a life insurance company. When the burial society cannot continue on the whole, the members have paid as little as possible, and certainly too little; however, the policy holders of such a company have paid sufficient amounts and yet come out empty in the end. 
 

When an insured, who has already been insured long enough so that for him, individual calculations result in a positive reserve, wants to give up his insurance policy, the company according to calculations could concede a buy back price, but in reality there is no money, for against the positive reserve of the long term insurance falls the negative reserve of a younger insured, and both reserves together cancel each other partly or fully. Therefore, as a rule, one seeks vainly in the insurance terms of such companies for a rule which obliges the company to buy back the policy; many companies declare frequently, naturally without adding the true reason, that a buy back in mass would be disadvantageous to the company. Naturally when one has to pay more than one has, that can hurt. 
 

We can establish different consequences of the unhealthy system of calculating with gross premiums. We want to mention only the following. When a company suddenly ceases every entry of new insurance policies, in the rational calculation the reserve will grow for a time if a stationary state had not already been entered. In any case the reserve grows less than when the new insurance policies are added. It is reversed in a system of gross premiums. If insurance policies are not being added any more during a series of years, the reserve will grow stronger than when new insurance policies are added. 
 

Several companies, that evidently are calculating with gross premiums, declare that they in the calculations of the value of future premium payments set apart a sufficient portion of the loaded premiums for the administrative costs. Suppose now that the value of the insured sums is calculated not only according to the same mortality table, but also the same interest rate as the value of the future premium payments [a higher interest rate in the calculation of the value of the insured sums, and many companies calculate this way, obviously would form this value as less and thereby cancel the setting aside of a part of the loaded premium for the administrative costs when not leading to worse results]; the partitioning of the whole loading would lead to a rational establishment of the reserve. As a rule, the premiums have colossal loadings, occasionally 40% or more of the net premiums and above; if now about 5 percent of it is partitioned, then the premiums that are to be used for the calculation of future premium income are loaded so sufficiently that the reserve for the individual insurance policy here also needs several years to go over from the negative to the positive. If the annual business profit with equal additions and without losses by lapsing would become equal [the same year after year], that is, in the sum, not in the percent of premium income then since a portion of the insurance policies will lapse to achieve the equal gain, the annual additions must grow or increase, and since with growing additions there also grows the number of lapsing insurance policies, the additions must grow for so much more. Should the annual profit not sink below a certain percentage rate of the premium income, the annual additions must naturally grow so much faster. Here as above, the condition of the company is tied to the demand that the annual additions must grow faster each year. Also for this case, there result the same consequences as when the reserves are calculated according to the loaded premiums only here, they occur somewhat slower and milder. 
 

If we summarize the above, then the mistakes of the reserve calculation from gross premiums which are higher than the net premiums calculated for the risk, but in general equal to the loaded premiums, consists of the following:

  
1) At the close of an insurance policy, there is calculated an artificial gain which consequently may not be realized and in so and so many cases is not actually realized; 
 
2) The reserve of the individual insurance policy is in and for itself already too low besides that the negative reserves of the younger insurance policies partly or wholly cancel the positive reserves of the older insurance policies; 
 

3) The gain mentioned under 1) is the sole or main source

a) for absorbing the administrative costs, 
b) for the coverage of the disappearing negative reserves as consequence of the premature expiration of the insurance policies, 
c) for the annual profit. 
Since both the first postings [ a) and b)] are necessary expenses and in addition growing ones, but since the profit mentioned under 1) cannot always grow further or what amounts to the same thing since the annual addition or growth cannot go higher forever with each following year, then the annual profit mentioned under c) sooner or later must let up and finally a deficit will come into existence and the bank will become insolvent.
  Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets Rawle O. King Specialist in Financial Economics and Risk Assessment August 15, 2013 Congressional Research Service 7-5700 www.crs.gov R43182 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 

Summary The federal government has an established institutional framework for disaster preparedness, reduction, prevention, and response—mainly disaster assistance. However, concerns have been expressed about the nation’s increasing exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards. The rising cost of financing recovery and reconstruction following natural disasters, reports of the nation’s increasing vulnerability to coastal hazards, questions concerning the capacity of state and local governments and private insurers to deal with the rising costs, and disagreements concerning the appropriate role of the federal government in dealing with these costs have all become major topics of congressional debate. The financial consequences of catastrophic natural disasters, such as Hurricanes Katrina (2005) and Sandy (2012), are largely a result of increasing population growth and the rising concentration of property assets in vulnerable disaster-prone areas. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Hurricane Katrina caused more than $80 billion in economic losses (both insured and uninsured) to private property and infrastructure and, more recently, Hurricane Sandy caused more than $65 billion in economic losses. New York and New Jersey—two of the nation’s most populous states—were especially affected by Hurricane Sandy-induced storm surge and coastal flooding. Sandy also triggered a sustained and heightened policy interest in the potential effects of climate change and population growth on the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the feasibility of innovative public-private sector catastrophe risk management and financing initiatives, and consideration of cost-effective and practical adaptation strategies to make society more financially resilient.  In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, a key policy question for Congress is whether the federal government should intervene in U.S. risk transfer markets to ensure the continued availability and affordability of homeowners’ insurance for all residents. Advocates of federal intervention in property catastrophe insurance markets argue that an inevitable mega-catastrophe event will exceed the financial capacity of private insurers and reinsurers, as well as state insurance programs. Thus, they argue, the federal government should consider establishing a national catastrophe risk-financing program to transfer diversified pools of risk to the capital markets to help states achieve better terms with regard to the cost of insurance protection.  In essence, advocates argue that state residual property insurance pools would benefit from global diversification by transferring government’s catastrophe risk to capital market partners through catastrophe swap or directly to capital market investors through (catastrophe) bond issuance, or the purchase options on their exposure to extreme weather events (weather hedge). These options would presumably reduce pressure on public budgets and help improve insurers’ access to capital to ensure adequate capacity and solvency of the insurance industry to meet consumer needs.  Opponents of federal intervention argue that the insurance and reinsurance industry—with access to existing innovation for risk-financing transactions—has withstood unprecedented recent extreme natural disaster events with minimal disruption.  As will be discussed, several catastrophic risk-financing legislative options are before the 113th Congress. For example, H.R. 737, the Homeowners’ Defense Act of 2013, would establish a National Catastrophe Risk Consortium to facilitate multistate pooling of catastrophe exposures (covering a variety of event probabilities and types) and transferring such risk through catastrophe-linked securities and insurance derivatives directly to investors in the capital markets. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 

H.R. 240, the Homeowners Insurance Protection Act of 2013, would create the National Commission on Catastrophe Preparation and Protection to provide for reinsurance of state disaster insurance programs. Under this proposal, the Treasury would auction excess-of-loss reinsurance contracts to public and private catastrophe risk-bearers, insurers, and state funds to improve the availability and affordability of coverage for homes. H.R. 549, the Homeowner Catastrophe Protection Act of 2013, would amend the Internal Revenue Code to allow insurers to establish pre-tax reserves by creating disaster protection funds for claims arising from future catastrophic events. Income allocated to the catastrophe reserves would be taxable as income only when withdrawn for the payment of losses.    




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 

Contents Introduction: Defining the Problem and Current Challenges .......................................................... 1 The Role of Private Insurers ............................................................................................................ 3 The U.S. Exposure to Natural Catastrophic Risk ............................................................................ 6 Types of Natural Disaster Losses .............................................................................................. 7 Climate Change, Risk Management, and Adaptations .............................................................. 9 Financial Management of Catastrophe Losses .............................................................................. 10 Risk Mitigation and Risk Transfer ........................................................................................... 11 The Limits of Insurability of Catastrophic Risks .................................................................... 12 The Role of Traditional Reinsurance ....................................................................................... 12 Types of Reinsurance Agreements .................................................................................... 14 Insurer Claims-Paying Capacity .............................................................................................. 15 State-Sponsored, Loss-Sharing Financing Mechanisms .......................................................... 18 Alternative Risk Transfer Techniques ............................................................................................ 19 Insurance-Linked Securities and Derivatives .......................................................................... 19 Contingent Risk Financing ...................................................................................................... 19 Catastrophic Risk Bonds ................................................................................................... 20 Sidecars ............................................................................................................................. 22 Industry Loss Warrants ...................................................................................................... 23 Catastrophe Equity Puts .................................................................................................... 24 Catastrophe Risk Swaps .................................................................................................... 24 Government Intervention in Risk-Transfer Markets ...................................................................... 26 Arguments for Intervention ..................................................................................................... 26 Arguments against Intervention ............................................................................................... 26 Potential Points of Agreement ................................................................................................. 27 Legislative Options ........................................................................................................................ 27 Concluding Remarks ..................................................................................................................... 29  Figures Figure 1. Total U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Property Losses, 1989-2012 ........................................... 6 Figure 2. U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Losses by Cause of Loss, 1992-2011 ...................................... 8 Figure 3. Illustration of Reinsurance and Retrocessionaire Transaction ....................................... 14 Figure 4. Illustration of Catastrophe Bond .................................................................................... 21 Figure 5. Catastrophe Bonds, Annual Risk Capital Issued, 2002-2012 ......................................... 22 Figure 6. Catastrophe Bonds, Risk Capital Outstanding, 2002-2012 ............................................ 22 Figure 7. Illustration of Sidecar Transaction.................................................................................. 23 Figure 8. Illustration of Catastrophe Swap .................................................................................... 25  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 

Tables Table 1. Top 10 Most Costly Catastrophes in United States ............................................................ 7 Table 2. Inflation-Adjusted U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Losses by Cause of Loss,  1992-2011 .............................................................................................................................................. 8 Table 3. Estimated Insured Hurricane and Earthquake Losses Nationally and for 10 States for 1-in-100-Year, 1-in-250-Year and 1-in-500-Year Catastrophes ............................................ 16 Table 4. U.S. Property and Casualty Operating Results, 2008-2012 ............................................. 16  Contacts Author Contact Information........................................................................................................... 30  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 1 

Introduction: Defining the Problem and Current Challenges The four major types of natural environmental hazards1 that can result in property damages or lost lives are (1) geophysical events, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions; (2) meteorological events, such as hurricanes and tropical storms, typically generated in the Caribbean Sea and Atlantic Ocean; (3) hydrological events, such as floods; and (4) climatological events, such as extreme temperature, drought, and wildfires.2 Economic losses (both insured and uninsured) from natural environmental hazards, especially from meteorological and climatological events, have increased in recent decades and have occurred with large spatial and interannual variability. For example, 8 of the 10 most costly catastrophes3 in the United States have occurred since 2000, including Hurricane Katrina (2005), which caused more than $80 billion in economic losses (both insured and uninsured) to private property and infrastructure and, more recently, Hurricane Sandy (2012), which caused more than $65 billion in economic losses.4  Most observers agree that it is highly likely that the United States will continue to experience increasing losses from natural catastrophes and that those losses will place increasing fiscal pressure on federal, state, and local governments as well as private risk transfer markets, which are currently responsible for a sizeable share of the total cost of financing recovery and reconstruction. The rising cost of financing recovery and reconstruction following natural disasters, reports of the nation’s increasing vulnerability (and resilience) to coastal hazards, questions concerning the capacity of state and local government officials and private insurers to deal with the rising costs, and disagreements concerning the appropriate role for the federal government in dealing with these costs have all become major topics of congressional debate.  The financial consequences of severe natural disasters, such as Hurricanes Katrina (2005) and Sandy (2012), are largely a result of increasing population growth and the rising concentration of property assets in vulnerable disaster-prone areas, such as coastal regions exposed to windstorms, river basins exposed to floods, and urban areas exposed to earthquakes. Climate change may also play a role. Moreover, the hazards posed by extreme weather-induced coastal hazards—namely                                                  

1 Scientists define a natural environment hazard as a threat of a naturally occurring event that will have an adverse effect on people or the environment. 2 This report does not address human-induced catastrophes. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program provides a financial backstop for private insurers exposed to terrorism risks. For more information, see CRS Report R42716, Terrorism Risk Insurance: Issue Analysis and Overview of Current Program, by Baird Webel. In addition, the National Flood Insurance Program provides property insurance for flood risks facing property owners and small businesses in the United States. 3 The U.S. insurance industry defines a catastrophe as an event that causes $25 million or more in insured property losses and affects a significant number of property/casualty policyholders and insurers. 4 For information on estimates of total economic losses from Hurricane Katrina, see National Ocean Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, “Service Assessment, Hurricane Katrina, August 23-31, 2005,” p. 1, located at http://www.nws.noaa.gov/om/assessments/pdfs/Katrina.pdf. For information on estimates of total economic losses from Hurricane Sandy, see National Ocean Atmospheric Administration, National Climate Data Center, “U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Data Sources, Trends, Accuracy and Biases,” located at http://www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/papers/smith-and-katz-2013.pdf. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 2 

sea level rise, storm surge, coastal flooding, and erosion—could prove challenging, not only for individuals and businesses, but also for affected state and local governments, especially given concerns about private insurers’ ability and willingness to manage and finance low-probability, high-consequence events. For example, New York and New Jersey—two of the nation’s most populous states—were especially affected by Hurricane Sandy-induced storm surge and coastal flooding. Sandy triggered a sustained and heightened policy interest in the potential effects of climate change and population growth in coastal areas for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the feasibility of innovative public-private sector initiatives for managing and financing catastrophic risks, and consideration of cost-effective and practical adaptation strategies to make society more resilient to damages from natural environmental hazards.5 This report opens with an examination of the current role of private insurers in managing disaster risk and their capacity and willingness to deal with the rising cost of financing recovery and reconstruction following natural disasters. This discussion focuses on the traditional mechanisms insurers use to hedge risk (e.g., reinsurance and retrocession) by arranging for the right to receive some level of reimbursement or indemnification when losses actually occur.  The report then examines the current role of federal, state, and local governments in managing disaster risk and dealing with the rising cost of financing recovery and reconstruction following natural disasters. This discussion focuses on the federal disaster recovery framework, which includes policies concerning disaster relief, insurance, and mitigation.  The report also examines various alternative risk (ART) financing options in light of the current level of uncertainty concerning the probability of catastrophic losses and the increased exposure and vulnerability of coastal areas to natural disaster damages. Some of these risk-financing options include state-sponsored loss-sharing financing mechanisms and private ART methods, such as insurance-linked securities (e.g., catastrophic bonds and contingent capital securities).  The report concludes with an examination of the rationale for and against government intervention in risk transfer markets and other legislative options currently under congressional consideration. For example, H.R. 737, the Homeowners’ Defense Act of 2013, would establish a National Catastrophe Risk Consortium to facilitate both multistate pooling of catastrophic risks (covering a variety of event probabilities and types) and natural disaster-linked securitization, thereby strengthening the financial capacity of these programs. H.R. 240, the Homeowners Insurance Protection Act of 2013, would create the National Commission on Catastrophe Preparation and Protection with the authority to establish a federal reinsurance program to make reinsurance coverage available to eligible state natural catastrophe insurance programs to improve the availability and affordability of coverage for homes and the solvency and capacity of homeowners’ insurance markets. H.R. 549, the Homeowner Catastrophe Protection Act of 2013, would allow insurers to make tax-deductible contributions to a tax-exempt policyholder disaster                                                  

5 In response to Hurricane Sandy, Congress passed the Sandy Recovery Improvement Act of 2013, which was included as Division B of P.L. 113-2, the Disaster Relief Appropriations Act, 2013. It provided $50.7 billion in disaster assistance. Congress also passed legislation (P.L. 113-1) to temporarily increase the National Flood Insurance Program’s borrowing authority by $9.7 billion (from $20.725 billion to $30.425 billion). For more information on P.L. 113-2, the Sandy Recovery Improvement Act of 2013, see CRS Report R42991, Analysis of the Sandy Recovery Improvement Act of 2013, by Jared T. Brown, Francis X. McCarthy, and Edward C. Liu. For more information on Hurricane Sandy funding for disaster assistance see CRS Report R42869, FY2013 Supplemental Funding for Disaster Relief, coordinated by William L. Painter and Jared T. Brown. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 3 

protection fund established for the payment of policyholders’ claims arising from certain catastrophic events.  Advocates of federal intervention in catastrophe insurance markets argue that an inevitable mega-catastrophe event will exceed the financial capacity of private insurers and reinsurers, as well as state insurance programs. Thus, they argue, the federal government should consider proposals for improving insurers’ access to capital in the reinsurance, banking, and securities markets to ensure adequate capacity and solvency of the industry to meet consumer needs. Opponents of federal intervention, on the other hand, argue that the insurance industry has withstood unprecedented recent natural disaster events with minimal disruption and insurers have the financial engineering tools and instruments to transfer insurance risk to investors in capital markets.  The Role of Private Insurers There is general agreement that disaster risk and uncertainties must be cost-effectively managed and financed to ensure economic growth and maximize social welfare. People and organizations typically purchase an ordinary insurance policy, the most common risk management technique, to reduce uncertainty and worry from their inability to predict individual future outcomes. The insured pays a fee in exchange for the insurer’s promise to pay a certain sum of money provided a stipulated event occurs. The insurer is able to offer protection against financial loss by pooling the risks from a large group of independent and identically distributed risks. In many cases, however, the risks to different individuals are not independent. For example, in a major hurricane, earthquake, or flood, many people may suffer at the same time. Economists refer to this situation as correlated losses. Insurers spread such risks not only across individuals (geographically or spatially) but also across time (intertemporal) through reinsurance contracts placed with separately capitalized reinsurers or loss reserves (surplus) built up in good years to offset unusually high losses in catastrophic loss years.  An understanding of the role of private insurers in the economy must begin, therefore, with the concepts of risk (or the variation in possible outcomes of a situation) and uncertainty, which is one of the decisive determinants of individual behavior. Economists observe that the goal of individuals is to maximize expected utility, and this has meant mitigating uncertainty with the purchase of an insurance policy. Under a typical insurance transaction, individuals transfer risk to an independent pool and, via the law of large numbers,6 insurers convert risky contracts into almost sure things. This pooling process permits the systematic accumulation of funds that provide for payment of losses in accordance with the terms of the ordinary insurance contract. Individuals in the group pay a specific premium rate instead of risking the uncertainty of a (potentially large) loss. The premium rate is equal to the actuarial value of the loss plus an amount to compensate the insurer for assuming the risk.                                                  

6 The law of large numbers is an important statistical theorem that, in essence, says the larger the number of exposure unites, the more closely will the actual results obtained approach the probable results expected from an infinite number of exposures. The theorem is important to the prediction of losses by insurance company actuaries and risk managers.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 4 

Economists observe that when risk transfer occurs in an uncertain environment, two basic problems arise: moral hazard7 and adverse selection.8 Both are founded on imperfect information. Moral hazards in insurance, for example, occur because the insurer does not have costless access to information possessed by the insured and therefore does not know whether the loss is caused by the insured’s carelessness or by chance. The insurer typically will reduce moral hazard by requiring the insured to bear some of the costs of the contingency, for example, by requiring a deductible. Insurers have addressed the adverse selection problem with proper risk identification and assessment, risk segmentation, risk-based premiums, and effective underwriting.  The traditional insurance mechanism is not sufficient for diversifying the risk of loss arising from large-scale natural disasters—a problem that became increasingly apparent to policymakers following Hurricane Hugo (1989), Hurricane Andrew (1992), and the Northridge earthquake (1994). The problem is that catastrophic natural disaster losses tend to be correlated, unpredictable, and costly when the events occur. Insurers traditionally protect themselves against catastrophic losses through reinsurance agreements with separately capitalized reinsurers. Reinsurers, like insurers, pool risk and diversify (spread) risk by writing many unrelated policies, and sometimes purchase reinsurance themselves, called “retrocession,” or enter into reciprocal loss-sharing agreements with other reinsurers to manage their risk portfolios.  Given the relatively small capital and surplus of the reinsurance industry—compared with probable maximum losses from a potential mega-catastrophic event—insurers recognized during the 1990s that the global reinsurance industry might not have been capable of funding large-scale catastrophic losses in the United States. Concerns expressed by policymakers ranged from the adequacy of insurance capital to the liquidity and transparency in the U.S. risk transfer market. By the mid-1990s, insurers and reinsurers began issuing insurance-linked securities, namely catastrophe bonds, to augment underwriting capacity and effectively hedge against potential catastrophic losses. During the 1990s and 2000s, Congress held relatively frequent oversight and investigation hearings into the competitive nature and solvency of the insurance industry and possible causes for market dislocation, especially pertaining to the availability and affordability of property insurance (and reinsurance) in high-risk areas following a major catastrophic event. More recently, Congress has held relatively few hearings on the subject, perhaps because of the increased use and availability of competitively priced (property) catastrophe bond issuance (i.e., insurance linked securities) that complement traditional catastrophe reinsurance. The main factor contributing to these relatively recent developments—with implications for reinsurance pricing, availability, and structure—is sustained capital growth in 2012 and 2013, and downward pressure on rates in the traditional reinsurance market to remain competitive, driven by an influx of capacity from alternative or “convergence” capital sources.9 As will be discussed later, institutional asset managers (primarily pensions) and sophisticated institutional investors (e.g., endowments and multi-strategy hedge funds) have increasingly shown an interest in accessing catastrophe risk on a liquid basis and stable, modest returns on investments that are non-                                                 

7 Specifically, in economic theory, moral hazard refers to a tendency for an individual (or entity) to be more willing to take a risk, knowing that the potential costs or burdens of taking the risk will be incurred, in whole or in part, by others. 8 Adverse selection, in economic theory, refers to the tendency for those exposed to a higher risk to seek more insurance coverage than those exposed at a lower risk.  9 Guy Carpenter & Company LLC, “Influx of Convergence Capital Triggers Downward Pressure on Pricing at June 1 Renewals, June 3, 2013, located at http://www.gccapitalideas.com/2013/06/03/influx-of-convergence-capital-triggers-downward-pressure-on-pricing-at-june-1-renewals/. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 5 

correlated to the balance of their portfolios.10 The result is that—for the first time—insurance linked securities (ILS) pricing is delivering a more cost effective risk transfer solution than traditional (reinsurance) vehicles.  Separately, a new potential catastrophic risk financing challenge appears to be emerging. Even if there is a sufficiently large and growing catastrophe risk transfer market—as most observers would argue appears to be the case—property insurers exposed to hurricane-driven, storm-surge damage to residential property risk along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts might still choose to restrict supply in favor of other, potentially more profitable, investments.11  In summary, with respect to the role of private insurers in financing natural catastrophic risks, Congress faces several policy issues and questions, including 1. Uncertainty concerning the probability of catastrophic losses. Uncertainty about how often catastrophic natural disasters occur (frequency), the geographic patterns, and the magnitude of these events (severity) poses a challenge to the financial management of catastrophic risk and a test of the effectiveness and reliability of existing prevention, protection, and compensation mechanisms in place. What is the scientific basis for assessing natural hazard risk? How well can the private sector and government predict natural disaster risks? How reliable and valid are current risk assessment models/methodologies and what are their implications for the pricing and availability of insurance and other risk spreading mechanisms?  2. Reducing potential natural disaster losses. A mega-catastrophic event striking a coastal region of the United States could impede interstate and foreign commerce and cause widespread economic hardship adversely affecting both the national and international economies. What is the current level of risk and its distribution between public and private sectors? What are the most cost effective ways to mitigate losses?                                                  

10 Guy Carpenter & Company, LLC, “Catastrophe Bond Update: First Quarter 2013,” May 2013, located at http://www.guycarp.com/portal/extranet/insights/briefingsPDF/2013/Catastrophe%20Bond%20Update%20First%20Quarter%202013.pdf;JSESSIONIDGCPORTALWCPORTALAPP=pjRQR2ZMLy5n2ppDpPxyl9lj5L5TdLYz4KTzdryXCkHpjs2bZg1p!-2116277995?vid=5.  11 Having insurance capacity does not ensure private insurers will choose to sell insurance. Other factors like rates of return on investment (cost of capital) remains a key determinant in whether insurers will offer insurance coverage in a particular geographical area or state.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 6 

3. Rethinking catastrophic risk management and financing strategies. Is the present mix of private market and public policies the most efficient and equitable way of sharing risk? What is the potential for financial instruments to transfer risk, including insurance risk options/futures (e.g., weather derivatives), government-backed contracts, and state or regional insurance pools? Given the insurance risk transfer market’s need for transparency and liquidity, what are the implications for regulation and federal intervention? Should Congress allow insurers to establish pre-tax reserves by creating disaster protection funds for claims arising from future catastrophic events? Income allocated to the catastrophe reserves would be taxable as income only when withdrawn for the payment of losses.  The U.S. Exposure to Natural Catastrophic Risk As stated earlier, the United States faces several types of natural catastrophic risk exposures that could result in lives lost and property and infrastructure damages. Figure 1 shows private insured catastrophe property losses in the United States from 1989 to 2012.12 Total losses are greater, sometimes more than two times greater, than insured losses.13 Figure 1. Total U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Property Losses, 1989-2012 ($ billions, as of January 2, 2013) 

$14.0 $4.8 $8.0 $37.8 $8.8 $26.4 $12.6 $11.0 $3.8 $14.3 $11.6 $6.1 $34.7 $7.6 $16.3 $33.7 $73.4 $10.5 $7.5 $29.2 $11.5 $14.4 $33.1 $35.0 $0.0$10.0$20.0$30.0$40.0$50.0$60.0$70.0$80.0899091929394959697989900010203040506070809101112*

 Source: Insurance Services Office’s (ISO’s) Property Claims Service and Insurance Information Institute Note: 2001 figure includes $20.3 billion for 9/11 losses reported through December 31, 2001 ($25.9 billion in 2011 dollars). This figure includes only business and personal property claims, business interruption, and auto claims. Non-property/business insurance losses equal $12.2 billion ($15.6 billion in 2011 dollars). The $35.0 billion loss figure for 2012 includes $18.8 billion in gross loss estimate for Hurricane Sandy. Table 1 shows the 10 costliest catastrophes—natural and technological—in the United States. Seven of the 10 most costly catastrophes were weather-related events affecting coastal states along the Gulf and Atlantic coast regions.                                                   

12 Uninsured or underinsured public losses from natural catastrophes, including destruction of public buildings, infrastructure, and transportation systems are either retained or reimbursed by the public expenditure of funds or tax relief.  13 For example, the National Hurricane Center typically doubles the estimated insured losses for an estimate of total damage losses in the United States.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 7 

Table 1. Top 10 Most Costly Catastrophes in United States ($ in millions; as of January 18 , 2013)    Estimated Insured Property Losses 

Rank Date Peril Dollars when Occurred In 2012  Dollars 1 Aug. 2005 Hurricane Katrina $41,100 $48,317 

2 Sept. 2001 Fire, explosion: World Trade Center, Pentagon terrorist attacks 18,779 24,345 3 Oct. 2012 Hurricane Sandy  18,750 18,750 4 Aug. 1992 Hurricane Andrew 15,500 25,364 5 Jan. 1994 Northridge, CA, earthquake 12,500 19,365 6 Sept. 2008 Hurricane Ike 12,500 13,329 7 Oct. 2005 Hurricane Wilma 10,300 12,108 8 Aug. 2004 Hurricane Charley 7,475 9,085 9 Sept. 2004 Hurricane Ivan 7,110 8,641 10 Apr. 2011 Flooding, hail, and wind including the tornados that struck Tuscaloosa, AL, and other locations 7,300 7,451 

Source: The Property Claim Services (PCS)—a unit of Insurance Services Office, a Verisk Analytics company. Note: Does not include flood damage covered under the National Flood Insurance Program.  Recently, the series of weather-related events—Hurricanes Sandy and Isaac (2012), Irene (2011), Ike (2008), and Katrina and Rita (2005)—demonstrated the nation’s vulnerability to coastal hazards. Sandy was the second-most costly natural disaster in U.S. history, behind Hurricane Katrina (2005) and close to Hurricane Andrew (1992). Sandy’s torrential rainfall and flooding in 14 states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast, from North Carolina to Maine, caused significant property and infrastructure damages in the affected areas. Coastal areas of New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut were especially hard hit.  Types of Natural Disaster Losses Table 2 and Figure 2 show U.S. insured catastrophe property losses from 1992 through 2011 by type of natural hazard in table format and pie chart, respectively. According to the Insurance Services Office’s Property Claims Service, an insurance industry group that collects data on catastrophes, the main types of natural catastrophes posing potential economic cost to the private insurance industry are hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, and winter storms. Hurricanes and tornadoes resulted in 76% of all catastrophe losses. Wind and hail damage from hurricanes are also major contributors to insurance claim losses.   




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 8 

Table 2. Inflation-Adjusted U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Losses by Cause of Loss,  1992-2011  Percentage Losses ($ billions) 

Hurricanes and tropical storms 42.0% $161.3 

Tornadoes  33.9 130.2 Winter storms 7.3 28.2 Terrorism 6.3 24.4 Geologic events 4.7 18.2 Wind/hail/flood 3.9 14.8 Fires 1.6 6.0 Other  0.4 1.4 Grand Total 100.0 384.5 

Source: ISO’s Property Claim Services (PCS) and Insurance Information Institute.  Notes: Adjusted for inflation through 2011 by ISO using the GDP implicit price deflator. Excludes catastrophes causing direct losses less than $25 million. Does not include flood damage covered by the federally administered National Flood Insurance Program. Includes losses from civil disorders, water damage, utility service disruptions, and any workers compensation catastrophes generating losses in excess of Property Claims Services threshold after adjusting for inflation. Figure 2. U.S. Catastrophe-Insured Losses by Cause of Loss, 1992-2011 

42.0%33.9%7.3%6.3%4.7%3.9%1.6%0.4%

Hurricanes and tropicalstorms

Tornadoes (2)

Winter storms

Terrorism

Geologic events

Wind/hail/flood

Fires (3)

 Source: ISO’s Property Claim Services (PCS) and Insurance Information Institute.  Notes: Includes $18.8 billion gross loss estimate for Hurricane Sandy, as of January 2, 2013. The rising cost of financing recovery and reconstruction following natural disasters is largely a result of increasing population growth and the rising concentration of property assets in vulnerable disaster-prone areas. For example, according to CoreLogic, a company that produces property information, analytics, and other services, more than 4.2 million homes along the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf coasts are located within storm-surge risk zones, totaling more than $1.1 trillion 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 9 

in property exposure.14 CoreLogic indicated that, based on theoretical future rises in sea level, there has been a significant increase in both the total number of properties at risk of potential destruction associated with storm-surge flooding and the total value.15  Historically, floods were considered the most frequent and costly natural peril in the United States. In 1968, Congress established the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to manage and finance the nation’s flood risks at a time when the nation’s flood hazards were largely associated with riverine (not coastal) flooding.16 The NFIP is the second largest financial risk and liability of the federal government behind Social Security.17  Today, the costs associated with extreme weather and climatic events can overwhelm the NFIP. In short, from a cost perspective, the perils of coastal hazards now rival, and perhaps surpass, riverine flooding.18  Climate Change, Risk Management, and Adaptations Most observers agree that climate change is a global phenomenon, with far-reaching economic, environmental, and fiscal implications for governments, risk management, and sustainability. A recent global-warming/climate-change study published by the United Nations World Meteorological Organization indicated that both land and ocean surface temperatures between 2001 and 2010 were the warmest since measurements began in 1850, and the global mean sea levels rose about twice as fast as the trend in the last century.19 The analysis also suggested that greenhouse (carbon dioxide) gases are changing the climate such that the world is experiencing an extended period of accelerated global warming. Scientists report that global warming accelerated in the four decades of 1971 to 2010, and the decadal rate of increase from 1991 to 2000 and 2001 to 2010 was unprecedented.20 Global warming, and its impact, has emerged as a pivotal, yet highly controversial issue in the disaster policy debate. Since the 1990s, and a series of increasingly costly natural disasters associated with extreme weather events, the potential impact of climate change on relevant natural hazards—hurricane-induced wind damage, coastal flooding, storm surge, thunderstorms/tornadoes, droughts, wildfires, and inland flooding due to both hurricanes and non-topical systems—has drawn increased attention from the public and U.S. policymakers. For instance, after Hurricane Sandy in 2012, there has been a growing awareness of the potential financial consequences of climate change and population growth in coastal shoreline counties (directly adjacent to the open ocean, major estuaries, and the Great Lakes) and U.S. coastal watershed counties (where the land area intersects coastal watersheds).                                                  

14 CoreLogic, “The 2013 CoreLogic Storm Surge Report,” May 31, 2013, located at http://www.corelogic.com/research/storm-surge/corelogic-2013-storm-surge-report.pdf. 15 Ibid. 16 For more information on the National Flood Insurance Program see CRS Report R42850, The National Flood Insurance Program: Status and Remaining Issues for Congress, by Rawle O. King.  17 Timothy Beatle, David J. Brower, and Anna K. Schwab, An Introduction to Coastal Zone Management (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2002), pp. 94-95.  18 National Ocean Atmospheric Administration, National Climate Data Center, “U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Data Sources, Trends, Accuracy and Biases,” located at http://www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/papers/smith-and-katz-2013.pdf. 19 United Nations World Meteorological Organization, “The Global Climate 2001-2010: A Decade of Climate Extremes,” located at http://www.unep.org/pdf/wmo_report.pdf. 20 Ibid. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 10 

Unlike the effects of climate change on the erosion of beaches that are observable and easily measured, the broader impact of climate change on coastal hazards—that is, sea level rise, storm surge, and coastal flooding—and the U.S. economy is arguably less apparent and remains controversial. The issue is not whether climate change affects people and the environment. Instead, the policy challenge appears to be twofold. First, there is no consensus on an objective scientific basis for determining (and agreeing on) the magnitude and scope of the effects of global warming and climate variability/climate hazards on the U.S. economy. Second, there is no consensus concerning what to do about the adverse impact of global warming and climate adaptation (and resilience) in communities along vulnerable U.S. coastlines.  While the impact of global warming—especially the impact of climate-induced changes on natural disasters—remains controversial, a consensus seems be emerging around two major climate risk and disaster management strategies issues. First, there appears to be a growing consensus among policymakers in favor of enacting national climate adaptation and risk management strategies, such as retrofitting or raising existing structures and building dikes, levees, and pumping facilities, rather than requiring the abandonment of the present sites of climate hazards (coastal areas and waterfronts).21 Opponents of the abandonment strategy argue that the coastal regions of the United States are economically vital to the nation’s long-term economic growth.  Second, there is arguably a limited U.S. capacity for financing catastrophic risks. What has become clear in the post-Sandy rebuilding and recovery phase designed to produce a more sustainable coastline is that risk transfer and financing for public infrastructure, buildings, transportation systems, and communities against the impacts of climate change could involve significant costs to governments at all levels due to added storm protection needed from rising sea levels and protection from coastal erosion. Insuring increasingly vulnerable residential private property risks will likely require a substantial increase in risk transfer capacity that is currently beyond the existing property and casualty (P&C insurer) insurance industry’s total claims paying capacity. Policymakers are currently examining the costs and benefits of comprehensive disaster risk management strategies that include possible private-public sector partnerships for producing new technologies, financial innovation in climate risk-assessment tools for determining damage potential, better planning in view of vulnerability (and recent storm histories), and catastrophe risk financing.  Financial Management of Catastrophe Losses The federal government has an established institutional framework for disaster preparedness, reduction, prevention, and response. Within this approach to disaster risk management, three programmatic elements stand out: disaster relief, insurance, and mitigation. Disaster relief assistance, for instance, meets the uninsured needs of disaster victims. The financial and technical resources provided through government relief are funded by annual and emergency supplemental congressional appropriations to the Disaster Relief Fund in the U.S. Treasury on behalf of (managed by) the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Insurance is purchased by recipients in the private market or through state-sponsored, risk sharing programs. Mitigation                                                  

21 For more information on New York’s effort to rebuild and recover from Hurricane Sandy see New York City Mayor’s Office, the “Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency,” June 11, 2013, located at http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/html/report/report.shtml. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 11 

consists of measures taken to prevent future losses, such as discouraging development in certain areas, or to reduce the losses that might otherwise occur.  Concerns about the financial burden of the rising response and recovery costs that may be anticipated from more severe future natural catastrophic events has led both Congress and the Obama Administration to explore alternative approaches to strengthen the nation’s capacity to prepare for, respond to, and recover from natural catastrophic losses. Policymakers, for example, are rethinking existing U.S. preparedness policies and strategies for managing catastrophic disaster risks in the context of the National Disaster Recovery Framework designed to ensure a unified, collaborative, and effective recovery support to disaster-affected states, Tribes, Territorial and local jurisdictions. The Presidential Policy Directive (PPD)-8 calls for FEMA to work with interagency partners to publish a recovery framework. This policy directive outlines specific steps to achieve the objective of “a shared understanding and a common, integrated perspective across all mission areas—Prevention, Protection, Mitigation, Response, and Recovery—in order to achieve unity of effort and make the most effective use of the nation’s limited resources.”22  Risk Mitigation and Risk Transfer There are two main ways to reduce net economic losses from natural disasters: mitigating or reducing physical vulnerability to economic damage and managing the residual risk (financial vulnerability) with financial risk strategies, such as risk transfer instruments, securities, and federal disaster assistance.  Private insurance and federal disaster relief are complementary mechanisms to compensate disaster victims and provide for recovery after a natural disaster. Risk management theory, however, suggests at least three reasons why private insurance is more efficient than federal disaster relief for allocating the risk of large catastrophic losses: • Federal tax and disaster relief assistance create negative incentives for risk mitigation (moral hazards) because the disaster victim’s eligibility for compensation is not dependent on whether they have taken steps to reduce their exposure to loss. This inefficiency results in higher social and federal costs of disasters.  • From a welfare economics or resource allocation perspective, federal disaster relief is inequitable because taxpayers pay the costs of disasters regardless of their exposure to risk.  • Federal disaster relief is less efficient than private insurance and inclined to misjudgment because property owners oftentimes do not fully understand the risks they face, make risk management decisions based on inaccurate information, and intentionally rely on disaster relief for compensation. Historically, insurance has been an efficient mechanism to deal with natural catastrophes; it establishes a price on the hazard, based on actuarial information, and creates economic incentives to mitigate losses.                                                  

22 For more information, see CRS Report R42073, Presidential Policy Directive 8 and the National Preparedness System: Background and Issues for Congress, by Jared T. Brown.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 12 

The Limits of Insurability of Catastrophic Risks The financial markets, which consist of the market for financial securities such as stocks, bonds, futures options, and insurance, allow the exchange of assets in the form of paper contracts and claims. They also allow the transfer and allocation of risk among different actors. Financial markets, however, are often “incomplete,” which means they provide only a limited capacity to pool risk and shift or allocate that across individuals.  The unique characteristics of natural disasters represent a challenge to mitigating risk incident to economic activities (property damages), financing the remaining residual risk, and compensating disaster victims. The key policy question that emerges is whether catastrophe losses are insurable. Traditional insurance principles suggest that a risk is insurable if the insurance market is able to cover potential losses reliably—and profitably—at a premium rate that customers are willing to pay. The problem is that to cover catastrophic risk, insurers must (1) assemble a sufficient number of similarly insured objects to allow a reasonably close calculation of probable future losses; (2) estimate the probability of the risk events (timing, frequency, intensity); and (3) limit an exposure to simultaneous destruction (where many policyholders experience losses at the same time). In the past, the solution to the catastrophic risk-financing problem has been for insurers to limit their overall catastrophic risk exposure to an acceptable level out of concerns about solvency and the cost of capital. Insurers accomplish this by means of (1) reinsurance, (2) pricing insurance rates using “catastrophe loads” to account for potential disaster-related losses,23 and (3) alternative risk transfer instruments that allow insurers to transfer fully collateralized liabilities through insurance-linked securities (ILS) to the global capital markets. However, insurance securitization—ILS issuance and trading—lacks a clear, transparent, and tradable platform.  The Role of Traditional Reinsurance Reinsurance is a form of insurance for insurance companies. Insurers usually hedge (or take offsetting risk positions) all or part of the risk assumed with the transfer (“cede”) of that risk, along with the associated premiums, to a reinsurance company. Reinsurance companies, in turn, are free to purchase protection against catastrophe losses from other reinsurers (“retrocessionaire”) and financial institutions.  Before discussing reinsurance transactions, four points are worthy of mentioning. First, reinsurance contracts are not standardized and the contractual terms and conditions can vary                                                  

23 To price their products so that rates do not have to increase significantly whenever a catastrophe occurs, primary insurers estimate future expected losses from insured catastrophic events and calculates catastrophe loadings applicable to all property insurance rates. All homeowners’ insurance rates include a component for this special catastrophe loading. Insurers offering insurance for catastrophic risk charge this load to build up reserves and purchase reinsurance. Catastrophe ratemaking procedures require the actuary to evaluate 30 years to 50 years of actuarial reported incurred loss data from many states subject to similar types of events, isolate the atypical catastrophic element, and then measure that catastrophic element against total losses. Data from the experience period losses rarely have direct impact on the catastrophe loading calculation for the current policy year, or in the state where the event occurred; instead, the recent catastrophe loss data are used to update the catastrophe loading calculation, which would be applicable to policies issued after the disaster. This process of spreading catastrophe losses on a state, regional, or national basis over a multiyear period has led in the past to the least disruption in insurance markets, in terms of price increases, insurer pullouts, and coverage restrictions. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 13 

widely from line-to-line and from market-to-market. Second, primary insurers will transfer risk to a reinsurer for five basic reasons:  1. Stabilize underwriting results;  2. Provide protection against catastrophic losses; 3. Increase underwriting capacity or the limits of coverage an insurer can prudently assume based on its surplus and the nature of the business written; 4. Enable an insurer to write a greater number of policies by reducing the size of the company’s liabilities; and  5. Provide a form of financing by increasing policyholder’s surplus.  Third, insurers typically purchase reinsurance from three sources: “professional” reinsurers, whose exclusive business is reinsurance; reinsurance departments of primary companies; and various organizations, such as reinsurance pools or syndicates, Lloyd’s, and government-owned companies.  Fourth, the regulation of reinsurance transactions is limited. Regulation occurs in the state insurance regulator granting credit for reinsurance on the balance sheets of the primary or ceding insurer. However, professional reinsurers domiciled in the United States must meet statutory licensing requirements (e.g., solvency and annual statement filing) similar to those required of a primary insurer in the state in which it is applying for permission to do business.  Figure 3 illustrates the basic financial hedging strategy of insurers using a reinsurance contract. Under a typical reinsurance agreement, the primary or direct insurer (cedant) transfers to the reinsurer (retrocedant) a portion of the risk the primary insurer accepted in issuing insurance policies. The primary insurer agrees to pay the reinsurer a premium in exchange for the reinsurer’s promise to indemnify the insurer, according to a specific formula. The expectation of indemnification (reinsurance “recoverables”) from the reinsurer enables the primary insurer to plan for contingencies more effectively by limiting the liabilities they assume. This, in turn, allows the insurer to provide greater amounts of insurance coverage on a direct basis. The reinsurer, in turn, may transfer to another reinsurer (retrocessionaire) a portion of the risk they have taken on from the primary insurer. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 14 

Figure 3. Illustration of Reinsurance and Retrocessionaire Transaction  

 Source: CRS presentation.  Types of Reinsurance Agreements There are two forms of reinsurance, which differ in the way primary insurers and reinsurers determine premiums and losses: proportional (“treaty”) and non-proportional (“facultative”). Proportional reinsurance covers broad groups of policies. Proportional reinsurance arrangements cover all of a primary insurer’s business or group of policies.  Proportional reinsurance agreements obligate the insurer and reinsurer to share losses and premiums in fixed proportions. The reinsurer retains the “faculty” or power to accept or reject all or part of any policy offered to it, and the insurer has the option to purchase reinsurance for a certain policy, and if so, when and from whom.  Non-proportional or “excess of loss” reinsurance agreements cover specific, individual risks. Under the arrangement, the ceding insurer is indemnified for the portion of a loss that exceeds a specific amount (the ceding insurer’s net retention), subject generally to a fixed limit of reinsurance. The premium paid by the insurer for excess-of-loss reinsurance typically bears no proportional relationship to the original premium paid by the policyholder. The rate is usually based on the potential for loss. Excess-of-loss agreements may cover policies on an individual basis or an occurrence, such as a tornado, an earthquake, or an aggregate of losses incurred over a period of time, usually a year. The two types of proportional plans are “quota share” and “surplus share.” Under a quota-share agreement, the insurer cedes a fixed percentage of each policy written in a certain line or class of business and receives a commission from the reinsurer for the business ceded. Under a surplus-share agreement, the primary insurer’s retention is stated as a dollar amount. If the amount of insurance under a policy is less than the retention, no liability is ceded. If it is greater than the retention, the excess—the remainder of liability up to the liability limits—is reinsured. The premium is shared in the ratio of the retained liability to ceded liability. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 15 

The catastrophe insurance market includes risk transfer through insurance and reinsurance contracts as well as risk financing alternatives to reinsurance, namely, the securitization of insurable risk and insurance derivatives such as futures and options.  The next section analyzes the private insurance industry’s risk transfer capacity; it excludes underwriting capacity from the reinsurance market and alternative risk transfer instruments.  Insurer Claims-Paying Capacity The insurance industry’s capacity to assume catastrophic natural disaster risk depends on how much capital and surplus exist on their balance sheets to absorb the annual variance in unexpected catastrophe losses. Within the context of a potential mega-catastrophic event, several scenarios could overwhelm the catastrophe insurance industry’s claims-paying capacity. For example, according to Aon Benfield, a reinsurance intermediary, global reinsurance capital stood at $505 billion in 2012.24 Although this level of capital might suggest the catastrophe insurance market industry is well capitalized, not all the global reinsurance capital is dedicated to financing U.S. catastrophic risks. Moreover, most disaster insurance experts agree that reinsurers appear no longer able to provide complete diversification of catastrophic risk both because catastrophic natural disasters appear to be correlated across risk and estimates of the probable maximum loss (PML) from catastrophes have risen dramatically.25 Most experts argue that for the very highest layers of catastrophe risk, federal disaster relief (and consequently the taxpayer) is now, by default (due to limited private-sector capacity in the traditional reinsurance market), the insurer of last resort, particularly for uninsured property owners. At the Congressional Research Service’s (CRS’s) request, AIR Worldwide Corporation, a catastrophe-modeling firm based in Boston, provided simulated estimates of potential insured catastrophe losses caused by U.S. hurricanes, earthquakes, and the fires that follow earthquakes. Loss estimates for the 1%, 0.4%, and 0.2% annual occurrence probabilities are illustrated in Table 3, which correspond to return periods of 100-, 250-, and 500-year losses, respectively.                                                   

24 Aon Benfield, “Reinsurance Market Outlook: Reinsurance Capacity Growth Continues to Outpace Demand,” January 2013, located at http://thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.com/Documents/20130103_reinsurance_market_outlook_external.pdf. 25 Hurricane Hugo was an unexpected but manageable $4 billion catastrophic loss event. After Hugo, the industry’s probable maximum loss (PML) for a catastrophic hurricane event was $8 billion. Many disaster insurance risk experts say the market for catastrophic risk changed after Andrew and the Northridge earthquake in 1994. Insurers began to use computer simulation modeling in their pricing, requiring hurricane deductibles, and generally began to withdraw coverage from high-risk coastal areas if they could not price risk to cover significantly higher future expected catastrophic natural disaster losses. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 16 

Table 3. Estimated Insured Hurricane and Earthquake Losses Nationally and for 10 States for 1-in-100-Year, 1-in-250-Year and 1-in-500-Year Catastrophes ($ in millions) Rank Area/State 100-Year Expected Loss (1%) 250-Year Expected Loss (0.4%) 500-Year Expected Loss (0.2%) 

 United States $108,387.18 $164,525.21 $217,031.79 

1 Florida 87,764.37 144,249.92 200,125.61 2 California 38,955.37 66,317.74 94,020.46 3 Texas 21,314.38 32,808.29 44,156.20 4 Louisiana 12,121.11 18,552.82 24,530.98 5 New York 9,331.85 24,587.73 35,829.62 6 North Carolina 9,326.91 15,343.76 21,395.14 7 South Carolina 7,706.53 14,629.53 20,559.48 8 Alabama 6,022.22 11,402.77 16,255.20 9 Massachusetts 4,968.07 9,134.62 13,793.45 10 New Jersey 4,003.32 10,699.68 17,597.08 

Source: AIR Worldwide, Inc. As shown in Table 3, AIR Worldwide Corporation found that the national PMLs for hurricanes and earthquakes are $108.4 billion for the 1% return period, $164.5 billion for the 0.4% return period, and $217 billion for the 0.2% return period. The corresponding numbers for earthquakes and fire (combined) losses are $50 billion for 1% events, $90 billion for 0.4% events, and $119 billion for 0.2% events. Table 4 shows the operating financial budget for the U.S. property and casualty insurance industry—both commercial and residential—for 2008 through 2012. As shown in the table, the U.S. property and casualty industry had a $586.9 billion surplus in 2012. At first, it would appear that this surplus for unexpected losses would be sufficient for the property and casualty insurance industry, as a whole, to be able to underwrite the levels of catastrophe insurance needed to address the level of losses estimated in Table 3. However, only about 20% of the industry-wide policyholder surplus, a measure of capacity, is generally considered to be allocated to catastrophe property insurance lines of business. The remaining 80% is used (some would argue needed) to support non-catastrophic risks. This suggests that approximately $108 billion of policyholders’ surplus is available for catastrophic property losses nationwide. When comparing this amount of insurer claim-paying capacity to the PML, arguably the insurance industry’s financial resources could be insufficient to cover anything more than a 1-in-100 year loss. Table 4. U.S. Property and Casualty Operating Results, 2008-2012 ($ billions)  2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 

Net Earned Premiums $438.1 $419.0 $420.5 $433.9 $449.4 

Incurred Losses & Loss Adjust Expenses 339.2 306.7 309.1 344.5 335.0 Expenses 118.1 113.4 119.5 124.0 129.0 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 17 

 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 

Policyholder Dividends 2.0 2.0 2.3 1.9 2.1 

Net Underwriting  Gain (Loss) (21.2) (3.1) (10.4) (36.5) (16.7) Investment Income 51.2 47 47.2 49.0 47.7 Other items (0.1) 0.8 1.0 1.2 2.3 Pre-Tax Operating Gain 29.9 44.7 37.8 14.8 3.3 Realized Capital Gain (Losses) (19.8) (8.0) 5.7 7.2 6.2 Pre-Tax Income 10.1 36.7 43.5 22.0 39.5 Taxes 7.7 8.4 8.9 2.9 6.0 Net After-Tax Income 2.4 28.3 34.7 (19.2) 33.5 Surplus (End of period) 455.6 511.5 556.9 550.3 586.9 Combined Ratioa       105.1 101.0 102.4 108.2 103.2 

Source: Insurance Information Institute. Notes: Figures may not add to totals due to rounding.  a. Insurers use the term “combined ratio” as a measure of underwriting profitability. It reflects the percentage of each premium dollar an insurer spends on claims and expenses. The combined ratio does not take investment income into account. A combined ratio above 100 indicates an underwriting loss.  To some, this line of reasoning arguably suggests federal intervention in catastrophe property insurance markets to address potential market failure in the range between the 0.4% to 0.2% return periods.26 Some finance experts may also be concerned about projections that catastrophic losses will likely double every 10 years and the present government insurance approach might not be adequate.27 John Seo, co-founder and managing principal at Fermat Capital Management, LLC, has asserted that a government insurance program might become challenged in its ability to cover losses for less than one generation’s worth of exposure growth.28 As an illustration, a $100 billion exposure is anticipated to become $200 billion after 10 years; $400 billion after 20 years; and $800 billion after 30 years. Ten years ago, a 1-in-100 event would have cost insurers $55 billion. Ten years from now a 100-year event could cost $220 billion. In light of the concerns about the capacity of insurers to pay claims after mega-catastrophes, primary insurers have increasingly turned to private capital markets for risk-transfer capacity to complement traditional reinsurance markets. Professor Kenneth A. Froot of Harvard University                                                  

26 This analysis simplifies the complex worldwide market for catastrophe property insurance and is intended only to provide an indication of the industry’s overall claims-paying capacity. This analysis, for example, does not determine the potential effect of natural catastrophes on the financial strength of insurers nor does it consider offsets from the broad spread and syndication of risk through heavy use of reinsurance, much of it foreign. A significant share of the impact on surplus associated with a mega-catastrophic event would be transferred to the insurance industry balance sheet in foreign countries like Germany, Great Britain, Switzerland, and Bermuda. In addition, the analysis does not consider the total amount of catastrophe reinsurance provided by state residual markets or state catastrophe funds that would increase the overall ability to insure catastrophic risks. As stated above, some insurers and reinsurers are able to raise new capital after a major catastrophic event. 27 Insurance Services Office, “Catastrophe Losses Will Double About Every 10 Years, Says Leading Catastrophe Modeling Expert at PCS Conference,” located at http://www.iso.com/index.php?id=2276&option=com_content&task=view. 28 John Seo, “Telephone communication with the author,” May 16, 2007.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 18 

has suggested that one reason for the search for alternatives to reinsurance has been the supply restrictions associated with capital market imperfections and market power exerted by traditional reinsurers.29 This situation is a matter of basic economics of supply and demand: a limited number of reinsurers with specialized knowledge and unique access to global capital markets can exert substantial control over prices and supply. Given recent historical losses and concerns with future mega-catastrophes, there is some concern that catastrophe reinsurance capacity may be insufficient to meet societal demand. State-Sponsored, Loss-Sharing Financing Mechanisms The exclusion of wind, water (flood), and seismic perils in the standard homeowners’ insurance policy led some states, beginning in the 1970s, to establish state pooling systems to finance natural hazard risks. These state-sponsored, so-called residual or involuntary property insurance pools include Fair Access to Insurance Requirements (FAIR) or Beach or Windstorm Plans and catastrophe funds that operate as insurers or reinsurers of last resort.  California, Florida, and Texas have created insurance companies—Florida Windstorm Underwriting Association, the Florida Citizens Property Insurance Company (CPIC), Texas Windstorm Insurance Association, and the California Earthquake Authority (CEA)—that provide wind and seismic insurance to high-risk property owners who may have difficulty obtaining such coverage from the voluntary property insurance market. Industry assessments support these entities.  FAIR Plans often provide property insurance in both urban and coastal areas, while state-run Beach and Windstorm Plans cover predominantly wind-only risks in designated coastal areas in states along the Gulf of Mexico and the Southeast Atlantic coast region. The CEA covers only primary residential buildings and provides limited coverage for building contents. Financing for the CEA comes from a combination of up-front and contingent insurer contributions, traditional reinsurance, and revenue bonds. Florida has a unique program for financing catastrophe losses through implicit reinsurance contracts backed, in part, by the state’s taxing authority. The Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund (Cat Fund) is a mandatory, state-sponsored catastrophe-reinsurance pool for property insurers writing business in Florida. Property insurers are required to maintain a retention—responsibility for a first dollar amount—against qualifying catastrophes in the state, but they may select to participate at one of three reinsurance coverage levels. The Cat Fund has the authority to spread the burden of unusual losses intertemporally through deficit financing—essentially imposing an intergenerational tax on future generations of state taxpayers.  In the wake of recent catastrophic losses, uncertainties surround the growing residual liabilities in state-run insurance pools and incentives to redistribute disaster losses to future generations (deficit financing). Some disaster insurance experts have proposed multistate pools on a regional or national level as a more effective mechanism for spreading and sharing disaster losses.30                                                   

29 Kenneth A. Froot, “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Examination,” Journal of Financial Economics, May 2, 2001, pp. 529-571. 30 George L. Priest, “The Government, the Market, and the Problem of Catastrophe Loss,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 12: 219-237, 1996.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 19 

Alternative Risk Transfer Techniques After Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the Northridge earthquake in 1994, there was recognition among insurers that existing capital within the insurance industry was inadequate to finance insurance risks. Some insurance industry participants were beginning to view the capital markets as a potential source of additional capacity. Deregulation of financial markets, the globalization of business, and innovation and technological advances in the 1980s and 1990s led to the evolution of derivatives as a risk management tool, and the application of securitization (the financial practice of pooling various types of assets into a security that can be purchased) to new insurance product lines, especially involving more esoteric or unique forms of insurance risk.  Consequently, capacity constraints in the insurance and reinsurance markets, corporate demand for more efficient risk financing (hedging) strategies, and the arrival of innovative capital market financial instruments created the market conditions whereby the insurance markets began to rethink the management of risk across traditional boundaries. This led to the development of alternative risk transfer (ART) techniques that could package insurance risk into discrete securities with finite risk, such that insurance risk could be traded and hedged in much the same way that interest rate risk is traded today.  In general, there are two categories of ART methods for financing catastrophic risk: (1) insurance-linked securities (catastrophe risk bonds) and exchange-traded insurance derivatives (catastrophe options and swaps); and (2) contingent risk financing. These ART techniques, driven by the need for risk management (“hedging”), balance sheet management, and capital management, have blurred the traditional distinction between insurance, securities, and banking. The first catastrophe risk securitization was the introduction of insurance derivative contracts (index-linked catastrophe futures and catastrophe put and call options) traded on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). By the late 1990s, several exchanges had introduced futures-and-options contracts on U.S. hurricane risk. Insurance securitization now represents a major risk-financing tool for transferring (hedging liabilities) windstorm and earthquake risk to investors in the capital markets.  Insurance-Linked Securities and Derivatives Insurance-linked securities (ILS) permit the transfer of event risk assumed by insurers directly to investors through event-linked issuance of debt. For example, catastrophic risk (CAT) bonds are ILS that performs a risk transfer function similar to that of insurance and reinsurance. CAT bonds are purchased in the capital markets. With a Cat bond, investors place cash into a trust account from which they receive interest payments. The funds in the account are transferred to the insurer only on the occurrence of a defined catastrophic event. Also, exchange-traded insurance derivatives enable the trading of standardized, catastrophe event-linked futures and options contracts linked to some index to improve risk sharing.  Contingent Risk Financing Contingent risk financing enables insurers and reinsurers to use contingent credit facilities to bridge financially the period between natural disaster events and the execution of post-event financing. Contingent financing instruments are designed to pre-finance insurance–related losses 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 20 

but without a transfer of the underlying insurance risks from insurer to capital market investors. The insurer only receives an inflow of capital to replenish its policyholders’ surplus after it pays for the loss. The insurer pays a capital commitment fee to the party that agrees in advance to buy the equity or debt securities following a loss. Contingent capital can be available to insurers immediately after a catastrophe, when the insurer most needs that capital, through a wide range of alternative capital sources, such as contingent surplus notes, catastrophe equity put options, sidebars, or industry loss warrants. The following discussion of ART instruments provides more in-depth information on the innovative uses of capital markets instruments, which are designed to achieve greater efficiency in catastrophic risk financing.  Catastrophic Risk Bonds The most common form of insurance linked securities is a catastrophic risk (CAT) bond used to supplement the traditional reinsurance marketplace. The securitized structure of a CAT bond is modeled on asset-backed securities transactions, such as mortgage loans, automobile loans, and student loans. The bonds are fully collateralized (eliminating concerns about credit risk), multi-year risk transfer financial (intertemporal diversification) instruments that allow for the direct transfer of catastrophic insurance risks from insurers, reinsurers, and corporations to investors in the capital market. The CAT bond typically covers the so-called high layers of reinsurance protection, for example, protection against events that have a probability of occurrence of 0.02% or less—that is, a return period of 50 years. CAT bonds provide an effective way for investors to target their investments and for insurers to access underwriting capacity from the larger capital markets.  Figure 4 shows a typical catastrophe bond issuance. The CAT bond transaction begins with the formation of a special-purpose reinsure (SPR)—a reinsurance company incorporated with the specific purpose of entering into a reinsurance agreement between the insurer (“cedent” or “bond sponsor”) and the investor. The SPR issues bonds to investors and invests the proceeds in short-term securities, such as government bonds or AAA corporate securities held in a trust account. The insurer pays a premium to the investor, usually LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) plus a risk premium in return for providing capital to the trust. To avoid interest-rate risk, the fixed returns on the securities held in the trust are swapped for floating returns based on LIBOR or some other widely accepted index. The bond pay-off is triggered (structured to pay off) by a defined catastrophic event. On the occurrence of the event, investors are subject to the loss of interest, principal, or both and the trustee for the trust account will release the principal in the SPR to help the insurer pay claims arising from the event. If no contingent event occurs, the trustee returns the principal to the investor upon the expiration of the bonds.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 21 

Figure 4. Illustration of Catastrophe Bond 

 Source: Cummings, J.D. and Barrieu, P., “Innovations in Insurance Markets: Hybrid and Securitized Risk-Transfer Solutions,” in Georges Dionne, ed., Handbook of Insurance, 2nd ed., Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2012. According to Guy Carpenter & Company, a provider of risk and reinsurance intermediation services, institutional asset managers—the custodians of trillions of dollars of investable assets—have largely accepted catastrophe risk as a component of mainstream investment strategy.31  Figure 5 and Figure 6 show catastrophe bond issuance totaled $5.85 billion in 2012, up from $3.86 billion in 2011. Catastrophe bond risk capital outstanding rose from $12.14 billion to $14.83 billion during the same period. In 2013, financial experts expect the market to approach, or exceed, the record for annual issuance of $7.0 billion set in 2007. Total risk capital outstanding increased during the first quarter of 2013, reaching an all-time high of $15.0 billion. This marked the eighth consecutive quarter of growth in risk capital outstanding, up more than 17% since the end of the first quarter of 2012. Although most disaster insurance risk experts see the expansion of the use of CAT bonds as an encouraging development in managing disaster risk, they also note that taxation, accounting, and regulatory barriers limit the likelihood of a rapid expansion of the insurance-linked securitization market.                                                   

31 Guy Carpenter & Company, LLC, “Catastrophe Bond Update: First Quarter 2013,” May 2013, located at http://www.guycarp.com/portal/extranet/insights/briefingsPDF/2013/Catastrophe%20Bond%20Update%20First%20Quarter%202013.pdf;JSESSIONIDGCPORTALWCPORTALAPP=pjRQR2ZMLy5n2ppDpPxyl9lj5L5TdLYz4KTzdryXCkHpjs2bZg1p!-2116277995?vid=5.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 22 

Figure 5. Catastrophe Bonds, Annual Risk Capital Issued, 2002-2012 ($ billions) 

$1.22 $1.73 $1.14 $1.99 $4.69 $7.00 $2.73 $3.39 $4.60 $3.86 $5.85 $0.00$1.00$2.00$3.00$4.00$5.00$6.00$7.00$8.0020022003200420052006200720082009201020112012

 Source: Guy Carpenter & Company and Insurance Information Institute. Figure 6. Catastrophe Bonds, Risk Capital Outstanding, 2002-2012 ($ billions) 

$2.95 $3.45 $4.04 $4.90 $8.54 $14.02 $12.04 $12.51 $12.18 $11.89 $14.83 $0.00$2.00$4.00$6.00$8.00$10.00$12.00$14.00$16.0020022003200420052006200720082009201020112012

 Source: Guy Carpenter & Company and Insurance Information Institute. Sidecars Figure 7 shows a sidecar transition, which is an innovative financial vehicle established as a special-purpose vehicle (SPV) formed by an insurance or reinsurance company to provide additional capacity to write reinsurance. Reinsurers favor the sidecar because they provide additional capacity without diluting shareholders’ equity. The SPV operates as a side vehicle—referred to as a “sidecar” company—to a larger established reinsurer’s operation. The sidecar (1) diversifies or spreads an individual reinsurer’s risk among the reinsurance community by issuing 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 23 

fully collateralized debt to its investors and (2) acts as a stop loss by partitioning reinsurers’ risks to improve their financial strength ratings by reducing the volatility of their earnings.  Figure 7. Illustration of Sidecar Transaction 

 Source: Cummings, J.D. and Barrieu, P., “Innovations in Insurance Markets: Hybrid and Securitized Risk-Transfer Solutions,” in Georges Dionne, ed., Handbook of Insurance, 2nd ed., Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2012. Operationally, an insurer or reinsurer will establish a sidecar by transferring policies and premiums to an SPR that uses the funds as collateral for bonds, loans, and equity. Hedge funds and private equity investors have provided the bulk of the funds to capitalize these unusual insurance investment vehicles. Investors would agree, for example, to invest the funds for two to three years and typically earned 20% to 30% return or more on their investments. The reinsurer creating the sidecar receives a commission. Investors typically obtain a relatively high investment return through interest payments and dividends from the trust when the sidecar expires, assuming that all of the capital has not been used to meet claims payouts. Industry Loss Warrants An industry loss warrant (ILW) is a contract between two insurers and is not pre-funded. Unlike traditional reinsurance, where the reinsurer pays a portion of the primary insurer’s losses according to an agreed-upon formula, the ILW is triggered by a predetermined level of industry loss. However, the ILW has a second trigger based on indemnity losses. The contract “warrants” that the reinsurer will pay up to a specific amount toward the buyer’s losses if the industry suffers a predetermined loss amount after the industry loss is triggered.  Industry loss trigger(s) are structured to provide prompt payment when, or if, aggregate industry losses for covered risks exceed a certain threshold for a single occurrence or sequential occurrences over the contract term. Importantly, since ILWs are priced and underwritten based on expectations of industry loss, underwriting information about the (re)insurance company is not needed, and the process and cost associated with these risk transfers is generally less significant 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 24 

than other options. The largest risk to the buyer of protection with these vehicles is basis risk. It is very possible that a (re)insurer could incur substantial losses, while the industry’s losses do not exceed the payout trigger. Therefore, these contracts are typically very attractive to larger insurers that have exposures mimicking the broader industry.   Catastrophe Equity Puts Catastrophe equity puts (Cat-E-Puts) are a form of contingent financing transaction in which the buyer has the option to issue preferred stock at a pre-agreed price on the occurrence of a contingent event. Insurers typically use Cat-E-Puts to raise equity capital at a favorable price after a catastrophe, when its stock price is likely to be depressed.  Cat-E-Puts are not asset-backed securities but options. A catastrophe equity put provides contingent capital on a post-loss basis, similar to a standby credit facility. A put option provides the option holder the right, but not the obligation to sell a security at a certain price at a future time. In this case, a reinsurer grants the option holder the right to sell its equity to the reinsurer at a set price in the event of a catastrophic loss.  The Cat-E-Put option buyer pays an option premium to the provider—option writer—of contingent capital. The option gives the buyer the right to obtain capital at pre-negotiated rates following the occurrence of a catastrophic event that exposes the company’s capital beyond the insurance or reinsurance program in place at the time of the event. Catastrophe equity puts provide off-balance sheet risk capital at a lower cost than conventional reinsurance.  Catastrophe Risk Swaps Figure 8 provides an illustration of how catastrophe risk swaps are executed between two counterparties, which have agreed to exchange streams of cash flows, based on movements in the value of an asset, yield, or index, according to predetermined rules. The swaps are traded in the over-the-counter market. The swap is executed on a zero premium basis, provided the difference in riskiness can be agreed upon.  In a catastrophe insurance swap, insurers may exchange policies from one region of the country for policies in another region. Each swap is a reciprocal agreement between the two insuring entities. These transactions allow insurers to diversify their portfolios. For example, an insurer in Florida with a heavy concentration of hurricane-exposed risk can swap a portion of that business for a book of business in Illinois, where it is less exposed to the same risk.  A different kind of swap could involve an insurer exchanging a series of fixed predefined payments for a series of floating payments whose values depend on the occurrence of an insured catastrophic event. If the catastrophic event occurs, the insurer receives a higher cash flow from the floating payment stream, which can be used to offset claim payments. Catastrophe swaps make existing capital more efficient and provide an advantage to both parties because they result in reduced risk and improved diversification at no cost.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 25 

Figure 8. Illustration of Catastrophe Swap 

 Source: Cummings, J.D. and Barrieu, P., “Innovations in Insurance Markets: Hybrid and Securitized Risk-Transfer Solutions,” in Georges Dionne, ed., Handbook of Insurance, 2nd ed., Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2012. Key Challenges Facing Insurance Risk Securitization Although catastrophe bonds trade with a somewhat higher spread over traditional debt, lack of standardized contracts, relatively limited trading volume due to a lack of liquidity, high cost, and uncertainty surrounding accounting, regulatory, and rating-agency treatment inhibit ILS market growth.  In general, the insurance-linked securitization market faces several challenges: 1. Uncertainty concerning the probability of catastrophic loss stemming from climate change, sea level rise, and storm surge; 2. Lack of uniform standards (e.g., language), institutional infrastructure, and methodology to evaluate the costs and benefits of risk transfer instruments that would facilitate comparison to conventional reinsurance; 3. Lack of standardized contracts for future delivery on organized exchanges (futures), and rights, but not guarantees for future delivery (options markets); 4. Unfavorable tax treatment of onshore securitization inhibits their utilization (regulatory recognition of offshore securitizations could encourage insurers to use this approach to manage their catastrophe risk);  5. Lack of tradable market indices (or granular data) for parametric transactions based on an index or a formula for payment; and  6. Limited secondary market makes insurance risk transfer instruments relatively illiquid. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 26 

Government Intervention in Risk-Transfer Markets Since the mid-1990s, most policymakers and insurance industry participants have agreed that a catastrophic natural disaster could cause an unexpected and sudden large loss of insurers’ capital reserves, leading to a rise in the price of insurance and a fall in supply. Given this risk scenario, some have called for an expanded role for the federal government in catastrophe insurance markets, arguing that such intervention is necessary to address market failure. Intervention could take any of several forms designed to expand the private sector’s ability to provide catastrophe insurance, such as adding a high-end federal reinsurance backstop, providing short-term government liquidity loans, or offering federal multiple-peril homeowners insurance policies covering both wind and flood damages. Arguments for Intervention Proponents of federal intervention argue that the government is the de facto insurer of last resort for mega-catastrophes, largely because the government is presumed to be better positioned to bear catastrophe risk because of its broad resource base and borrowing capacity.32 The federal government, however, currently lacks a comprehensive approach to manage the effects of catastrophic natural disasters, relying instead on ad-hoc disaster relief spending to facilitate recovery and rebuilding following a major disaster. Federal financial intervention in the catastrophe reinsurance market, some contend, could reduce the burdens for future disaster relief expenditures, promote efficient risk management by property owners, and encourage individuals and states to take steps to reduce loss exposure, ultimately resulting, in theory, in overall lower social and federal costs. Some argue that an explicit ex ante federal government catastrophic risk financing approach would arguably be the best way to assess, budget, and plan for the future cost of catastrophe risks before such events occur.33 Arguments against Intervention Opponents of federal intervention in catastrophe insurance markets insist that there is sufficient private insurance and reinsurance capacity to adequately cover catastrophic risks. They insist the federal government’s role in disaster risk financing should be to ensure a framework that allows private market mechanisms to work without local regulatory interference (i.e., regulatory price constraints that seek to keep premium rates below actuarial rates).34 In their view, federal intervention in catastrophe insurance markets is likely to have negative unexpected side effects, such as moral hazard, and reduces the economic disincentives for homeowners and businesses to locate in disaster-prone areas or neglect risk prevention. They argue that private insurers, state residual markets, and state catastrophe funds already protect coastal properties, and federal                                                  

32 National Association of Insurance Commissioners, “Natural Catastrophe Risk: Creating a Comprehensive National Plan,” June 15, 2009, located at http://www.naic.org/documents/committees_c_natural_catastrophe_plan_final.pdf. 33 Ibid.  34 See Mark A. Hofmann, “Insurers, Reinsurers Oppose National Catastrophe Fund for Homeowners,” March 24, 2013, located at http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20130324/NEWS04/303249981#; and Personal Letter from Chris Hackett, Director, Policy Development and Research, Property Casualty Insurers Association of America to Matthew A. McKenney, Federal Insurance Office, U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 24, 2013, located at http://www.pciaa.net/web/sitehome.nsf/lcpublic/379/$file/PCI_Comments_FIO_Nat_Cat_062413.pdf.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 27 

government intervention would only distort the insurance market by regulating the availability of coverage and level of premiums, displacing private capital deployed in insurance and reinsurance, and stifling innovative private sector solutions for managing and financing catastrophic risks.35 Government insurance schemes, they say, would not reflect the risk level of the activity being insured, thereby eliminating a potentially powerful economic deterrent to risky behavior. Moreover, government intervention could force the public at large to cross-subsidize the risky behavior of residents in high-risk areas. Potential Points of Agreement Some consensus is that the federal government could use its regulatory authority to create incentives for private capital to flow into the property insurance market, such as establishing strong building codes, encouraging effective land planning techniques, and requiring a state insurance regulatory environment that fosters competition and risk-based pricing. In addition, there is some consensus that the federal government could help decrease barriers in the nascent markets for insurance-linked securities (ILS) and provide liquidity through temporary loans designed to stabilize the market after a mega-catastrophe. Other “common ground” topics include clarifying accounting rules for special-purpose reinsurers and changing the rules to require foreign and domestic reinsurers to meet the same collateral requirements. Legislative Options Several catastrophic risk-financing legislative options are before the 113th Congress. For example, H.R. 737, the Homeowners’ Defense Act of 2013, would establish a National Catastrophe Risk Consortium to facilitate both multistate pooling of catastrophic risks (covering a variety of event probabilities and types) and natural disaster-linked securitization, thereby strengthening the financial capacity of these programs.  H.R. 737 is designed to facilitate catastrophic risk transfer to capital markets and increase transparency (liquidity) in the market for catastrophic risk. The bill would establish the National Catastrophe Risk Consortium, a voluntary organization that states can choose to join that would be charged with facilitating financial innovation to allow participating states to transfer catastrophic risk to the capital market. The aim of the consortium would be to ensure the availability and affordability of homeowner’s insurance coverage for catastrophic events. To facilitate catastrophe risk securitization, the consortium would use an integrated risk valuation method that identifies, tracks, and publicizes the risks embedded in financial transactions. The insurance risk securitization, serialization, bundling, and re-bundling of risk-adjusted assets within a single transaction process will be transferred to the capital market through a catastrophe risk interactive exchange platform.  In theory, the consortium would standardize natural catastrophe peril bond terms, tranches, and pay out formulae, which, in turn, would enhance the marketability/liquidity of risk-linked securities, such as catastrophe bonds structured to attract more capital. Credit rating agencies would rate the various tranches according to their expected loss. The consortium would issue catastrophe bonds, and other innovative financial instruments, using an electronic platform with a                                                  

35 Ibid.  




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 28 

common legal structure and documentation. Securities would be issued by the consortium in an SEC 144A private placement to investors who are Qualified Institutional Buyers or similar classes of investors, and who sign an Investor Awareness Letter. Reinsurance credit would be granted by the insurance regulator based on the full collateralization of the reinsurance contract within a Regulation 112 trust, with suitable investment restrictions. The consortium would transfer the catastrophe risk directly to international catastrophe reinsurance and capital markets on competitive terms. States would presumably grant reinsurance credit based on the full collateralization of the reinsurance contract within a Regulation 112 trust, with suitable investment restrictions. The consortium is structured to overcome regulatory and tax constraints to catastrophe risk transfer through securitization. Removal of regulatory and tax constraints associated with catastrophe bonds and other alternative financial instruments issued by the National Catastrophe Risk Consortium could, in theory, increase the capacity of the private capital market to assume more catastrophe risk. H.R. 240, the Homeowners Insurance Protection Act of 2013, would create the National Commission on Catastrophe Preparation and Protection with the authority to establish a federal reinsurance program to make reinsurance coverage available to eligible state natural catastrophe insurance programs to improve the availability and affordability of coverage for homes, and the solvency and capacity of homeowners’ insurance markets.  Congress could choose to provide tax incentives designed to expand the supply of capital reserves that stand behind private insurance. H.R. 549, the Homeowner Catastrophe Protection Act of 2013, would allow property and casualty insurance companies to make tax-deductible contributions to a tax-exempt policyholder disaster protection fund established for the payment of policyholders’ claims arising from certain catastrophic events, such as windstorms, earthquakes, fires, or floods.36 This tax law change would encourage the use of reinsurance by assessing the reserve amounts on net premiums.  Current tax provisions do not encourage insurers to reserve funds for unknown losses. Reserves for such contingencies can only be accumulated out of after-tax income. In contrast, reserves set aside for reported losses, or losses incurred but which have not been reported at the end of a given accounting period, are not taxed by the federal government. Allowing insurers to accumulate tax-deferred reserves for catastrophe perils would reduce federal tax revenue, and may involve tax benefits that favor one type of activity over another, raising issues of efficiency. Economists have raised the question of whether tax incentives for homeowners would be sufficient to get people to buy disaster insurance. Congress might decide to assess the cost-benefit of the provision for tax deductibility of catastrophe reserves against possible savings in ad hoc disaster relief outlays. Congress might also choose to consider several other legislative options to address the financial consequences of catastrophic natural disaster losses. These include • Bipartisan Study Commissions. Congress could choose to establish a bipartisan study commission to examine various proposals to improve capabilities of the insurance marketplace to provide sufficient capacity to facilitate the pooling and spreading of risk from catastrophic financial losses from natural disasters.                                                  

36 See CRS Report RL33060, Tax Deductions for Catastrophic Risk Insurance Reserves: Explanation and Economic Analysis, by Rawle O. King. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 29 

• Implement a Federal Multiple Peril Insurance Program. In the aftermath of the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy, one policy option that Congress might consider would be to authorize the creation of multi-peril property insurance policies that cover wind perils under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Multiple peril insurance could eliminate the problem of uninsured property owners, but it could also create new uncertain liabilities for federal taxpayers. • Federal Catastrophe Liquidity Loan and Debt Guarantee Program. Congress might decide to authorize the U.S. Treasury to guarantee municipal obligations of state sponsored and quasi-state sponsored municipal bonds and provide liquidity loans to state “qualified reinsurance programs” for natural disasters. The loan program could dampen swings in insurance rates and address availability deficiencies caused by inefficient capital markets. The federal guarantees of debt issuance would complement existing state-sponsored measures that pre-fund insured property catastrophe exposures through insurance premiums and assessments on insurers.  Concluding Remarks In recent decades, the financial volatility of large-scale natural catastrophes and the cost of financing recovery have emerged as important policy issues for Congress. However, besides the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002,37 Congress has not approved an explicit federal disaster insurance law, since the creation of the NFIP in 1968, because of a lack of consensus that a catastrophe risk-financing problem exists. Concerns expressed have included disagreements about what constitutes adequate provisions for mitigation, a desire to avoid unnecessary government intrusion into markets served by the private sector (crowding out), moral hazards associated with government guarantees or economic subsidies that distort market incentives and increase social costs, and the potential for expanded financial liabilities and burden on federal taxpayers.38  With this in mind, a key policy challenge for Congress is determining whether private insurers and their reinsurance partners have the financial capacity to absorb losses from a future mega-catastrophe and, if necessary, what reforms would improve insurers’ access to capital to ensure adequate capacity. Is there a need to improve the nation’s ability to finance catastrophe risk and, if so, how? Congress, for example, might choose to consider the appropriate roles and policies of the public and private sectors in addressing disaster risks.  Three key points of view usually emerge when debating catastrophe-funding issues. One view is that natural catastrophes are “uninsurable” in the private sector and the federal government should intervene to either directly underwrite catastrophe risks or provide a federal reinsurance backstop to private insurers, reinsurers, or state pools. This view has not been widely supported in the past because it was believed that the private sector had access to sufficient capital to enable it to finance the cost of providing catastrophic insurance.                                                   

37 P.L. 107-297; 116 Stat. 2322. For more information on the TRIA, see CRS Report R42716, Terrorism Risk Insurance: Issue Analysis and Overview of Current Program, by Baird Webel.  38 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Natural Disasters: Public Policy Option for Changing the Federal Role in Natural Catastrophe Insurance, GAO-08-07 (Washington: November 26, 2007), located at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d087.pdf. 




Financing Natural Catastrophe Exposure: Issues and Options for Improving Risk Transfer Markets  

Congressional Research Service 30 

A second point of view argues that catastrophe risk is insurable up to a point but federal involvement in the catastrophe insurance market would be required for a mega-catastrophic disaster. Many disaster insurance experts agree with this point of view; namely, for the very highest layers of catastrophe risk, the government (and consequently the taxpayer) is now, by default, the insurer of last resort. They support the idea of a public-private partnership in financing a mega-catastrophe. Such a public-private catastrophe insurance partnership would presumably leave the private sector responsible for underwriting property insurance and the federal government responsible for providing capital only when consumers and the private insurance and capital markets are unable to do so.  Under this arrangement, as envisioned by some disaster insurance experts, the government could facilitate a more effective risk spreading that achieves more effective pooling of losses over time and broader pooling of losses among risks through a borrowing mechanism (debt financing) and tax deferral of loss reserves for natural disasters. Broader pooling of losses among risks requires government-imposed mandatory purchase requirements. Economists note, however, that any scheme that imposes a mandatory insurance requirement for all property owners could create economic distortions, such as cross subsidization of risks, where low-risk individuals subsidize high-risk individuals. A third point of view presupposes that financial resources in the private sector are sufficient to make federal intervention not necessary in catastrophe insurance markets. For risks to be insurable, however, they must be actuarially determined and risk-based, albeit potentially prohibitively high for the average household. However, if insurance rates are priced outside of the household budget of the average individual, the insurance product becomes essentially unmarketable—even with a government purchase mandate, as evidenced by the relatively low participation (purchase) rates in high-risk flood zones where a federal mandatory flood insurance purchase requirement exists.  In conclusion, several policy options for expanding the federal role in financing natural disaster losses are currently under consideration, but enactment into law will likely be based on whether it can be shown that potential catastrophe losses, in the absence of federal intervention, are beyond the capacity of private markets to diversify catastrophe risks.   Author Contact Information  Rawle O. King Specialist in Financial Economics and Risk Assessment rking@crs.loc.gov, 7-5975     


Printed in the Philippinesfor Asia and the PacificNatural CatastropheRisk Insurance Mechanisms

Printed in the Philippines

Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific—Main ReportNatural catastrophes are a major threat to sustainable development, especially in Asia and the Pacific. ADB’s developing member countries are particularly vulnerable. Catastrophe risk could be transferred through a regional public–private insurance partnership. This is the key finding of the Asian Development Bank Conference on Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific held in Tokyo in November 2008.This report answers questions about disaster risk management and shows how ADB can ease access to catastrophe risk transfer mechanisms. It also suggests that a regional approach is an appropriate mechanism to bridge existing gaps and to unlock resources needed to better manage risk.About the Asian Development BankADB’s vision is an Asia and Pacific region free of poverty. Its mission is to help its developing member countries substantially reduce poverty and improve the quality of life of their people. Despite the region’s many successes, it remains home to two thirds of the world’s poor: 1.8 billion people who live on less than $2 a day, with 903 million struggling on less than $1.25 a day. ADB is committed to reducing poverty through inclusive economic growth, environmentally sustainable growth, and regional integration.      Based in Manila, ADB is owned by 67 members, including 48 from the region. Its main instruments for helping its developing member countries are policy dialogue, loans, equity investments, guarantees, grants, and technical assistance. 

Asian Development Bank6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City1550 Metro Manila, Philippineswww.adb.orgISBN 978-971-561-799-4Publication Stock No. RPT090284Main Report




4–5 November 2008, Tokyo, Japan Conference supported by the Asian Development Bankand the Ministry of Finance, Government of Japan 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri1   1

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM

for Asia and the PacificNatural CatastropheRisk Insurance MechanismsMain Report




© 2009 Asian Development Bank

All rights reserved. Published 2009. Printed in the Philippines. ISBN 978-971-561-799-4Publication Stock No. RPT090284Cataloging-In-Publication DataAsian Development Bank.

 Natural catastrophe: risk insurance mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific—main report.

Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2009.

1. Insurance. 2. Risk management. 3. Disaster management 4. Asia and the Pacific. I. Asian Development Bank.

The views expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) or its Board of Governors or the governments they represent. ADB does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility for any consequence of their use.Use of the term “country” does not imply any judgment by the authors or ADB as to the legal or other status of any territorial entity.ADB encourages printing or copying information exclusively for personal and noncommercial use with proper acknowledgment of ADB. Users are restricted from reselling, redistributing, or creating derivative works for commercial purposes without the express, written consent of ADB.6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City1550 Metro Manila, PhilippinesTel +63 2 632 4444Fax +63 2 636 2444www.adb.orgFor orders, contact Department of External RelationsFax +63 2 636 2648adbpub@adb.orgContents

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri2   2

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM




Executive Summary v

Background and Credits xi

Glossary of Terms xiii

Acronyms and Abbreviations xv

Overview 1

Historical Background 3

Opportunities to Use Catastrophe Risk Finance and How ADB Could Best Facilitate the Process 4

Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk Finance in Asia and the Pacific 7

Overview 7

Leveraging Insurance and Capital Markets Against Natural Catastrophes  8

Are There Deficiencies in the Commercial Insurance Market’s Coverage of the Asia and Pacific  

Catastrophe Risk and Does Risk Pooling Bridge the Gap? 11

Building Blocks of Catastrophe Insurance: Catastrophe Risk Models—Their Purpose and Importance 15

Catastrophe Insurance Triggers: What is the Best Fit for Asia and the Pacific? Why Does it Matter?  

What Initiates a Payment Under a Catastrophe Risk Insurance Policy? 17

Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific 23

Creating a Viable Risk Pool for the Pacific 23

Overview 23

Opening Addresses 23

The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility 24

Pacific Catastrophe Risk Financing Initiatives 26

Options for Catastrophe Risk Transfer in the Pacific Region 28

Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific 33

Catastrophe Insurance for Megacities 33

Objectives 33

Background: Megacity Growth Introduces Disaster Risks that Merit Special Attention 33

Overview: Tailoring Solutions for Each Megacity’s Situation and Priorities 37

Areas for Consideration 43

Framework Statement 43

Recommendations 44

Contents

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri3   3

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM




ivNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific

Appendixes 49

Appendix I: List of Conference Papers 49

Appendix II: Conference Report Summaries 51

List of Figures

Figure 1: Strengths and Weaknesses of the Public and Private Sector in Catastrophe Risk Management 2

Figure 2: Example of a Risk Pool 12

Figure 3: Trend in Annual Reports of Natural Disasters in the Pacific Islands 24

Figure 4: Munich Re’s Megacity Risk Index 34

Figure 5: Megacity Contribution to National GDP in Asia in 2005 and Projected for 2020 35

List of Boxes

Box 1: Report Highlight: Disaster Risk Management Principles 4

Box 2: Report Highlight: The Hyogo Framework for Action 5

Box 3: Report Highlight: Insurance-Linked Financial Products 9

Box 4: Report Highlight: Credit Crisis Update 10

Box 5: Report Highlight: Insured Catastrophe Losses in 2008 13

Box 6:  Report Highlight: The Inter-American Development Bank Approach 

 to Ex Ante

 Disaster Risk Management 14

Box 7: Report Highlight: Risk Pooling 36

Contents

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri4   4

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM




iv

Executive SummaryIntroductionThis summary reviews the key issues and discussions that occurred during the Asian Development Bank (ADB) Conference on Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific held in Tokyo on 4–5 November 2008. The conference featured a general plenary session followed by a day of focused workshops. The summary concludes with a series of recommendations based on the conference results.The key finding of this report is that many opportunities exist for transferring natural disaster risk in Asia and the Pacific if addressed within a regional public–private partnership (PPP). That partnership must necessarily include national governments, all regional development partners and institutions, and key private sector players, both global and local. The opportunities discussed in this report will largely remain opportunities unless obstacles and gaps in knowledge, research, and experience are bridged. A regional approach to bridging these gaps, involving all critical parties, represents the best chance to unlock the resources necessary to move the region forward to better disaster risk management (DRM).Background and ObjectivesDeveloping member countries (DMCs) are vulnerable to natural hazards given their location, fragile economies, and relatively modest investment in disaster management planning. Natural catastrophes are a major threat to sustainable development. New developments in catastrophe risk financing markets have expanded the opportunities to transfer natural catastrophe risks originating within Asia and the Pacific. Designing such catastrophe risk transfer programs in conjunction with comprehensive DRM strategies further enhances their attractiveness to global risk finance markets. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri5   5

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM




Executive SummaryNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacificvivii

vivii

Following the Hyogo Framework for Action in 2005, ADB 

 initiated a technical assistance project, Development of Catastrophe Risk Insurance, which explored catastrophe risk insurance opportunities for the region. A key recommendation of that report urged ADB to host a small workshop to consider natural catastrophe insurance mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific.The objectives of the conference were to (i) alert DMCs to  new opportunities to transfer natural catastrophe risk using both traditional insurance and recent capital market mechanisms; (ii) assess the opportunities for catastrophe risk transfer in the Pacific island countries, based on an initiative led by the World Bank; and (iii) consider the feasibility of developing risk transfer programs for Asian megacities. The Fundamental Issues of  Catastrophe Risk Finance  in Asia and the PacificLeveraging insurance and capital markets The key finding from the conference was that market interest in developing risk transfer mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific is substantial. This interest derives not only from traditional insurance and reinsurance sources, which have and continue to be active in developing risk transfer mechanisms for the region, but also from global capital markets, which have a more recent interest in becoming engaged with the region. That interest derives principally from a desire to develop a portfolio asset class uncorrelated to traditional capital market asset risk parameters, such as interest rates and economic cycles. This interest in developing risk transfer solutions also stems in part from the gradual merging of the traditional insurance market and the deeper and more liquid capital markets. The assimilation of these formerly distinct markets has produced hybrid risk transfer products such as catastrophe bonds and other risk transfer mechanisms that have brought capital market strengths to bear on behalf of sovereign interests as well as traditional insurers and reinsurers. International financial institutions are exploring different regional approaches to catastrophe risk transfer. For example, the Inter-American Development Bank has advanced an integrated DRM model that combines elements of fiscal planning, risk mitigation, and risk transfer. Such efforts deserve careful study and could serve as models for regional partnership efforts in the region.Deficiencies in the commercial marketThe key question is whether there is a gap between what DMCs currently look for and require from catastrophe risk markets, and what those markets are prepared to offer. Further, if such a gap exists, what can international financial institutions do to fill the gap and what kind of PPP makes sense?Such a gap does appear to exist. The paradox is that despite low premium rates, usage and acceptance of such insurance is relatively low, notwithstanding increased frequency and severity of disaster losses in DMCs in recent years. Explanations for this gap ranged from lack of insurance affordability, low levels of awareness of the full economic impact of natural disasters and the general availability of insurance solutions, and the possibility that traditional insurance solutions might be incompletely addressing the appropriate hazards and people’s real needs and concerns. The building blocks of catastrophe insuranceHigh quality catastrophe risk models are an essential ingredient to an active and competitive catastrophe  risk-financing marketplace in Asia and the Pacific. Currently, such models are not adequately developed in DMCs because of issues of scale and the expense of model development and maintenance. Development of high quality models involves significant effort in collecting data relating to hazard assessment, exposures, vulnerability, and loss histories. The function of catastrophe risk models is two-fold: to  establish proper risk pricing and to assure proper risk diversification (noncorrelation). The latter function helps  

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri6   6

7/7/2009   4:01:54 PM




vivii

viviiNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificExecutive Summary

assure that a given portfolio of risk will not be 

substantially impacted by a single or compound hazard event. Current catastrophe models are not well adapted to the most relevant hazards impacting Asia and the Pacific. In particular, flood is likely the most critical hazard in need of modeling in the region, yet it remains the most technically challenging. The development of quality loss models in the region is  an essential precursor to more active commercial market interest. As such, the donor community can help to secure greater private sector interest by funding the development and maintenance of these models. Such models can also be used as effective risk mitigation tools by informing governments of the consequences of enacting particular policies and infrastructure decisions.Catastrophe insurance triggersParametric insurance pays an insured based on the occurrence of an event, not the magnitude of the resulting loss. As such, trigger mechanisms must be devised to  determine whether such an event has occurred and if  payment under a parametric insurance contract is required. Such triggers may be of a pure parametric nature (e.g., based purely on wind speed readings) or based on a parametric index or model (e.g., payment is based on a formula, index, or model as a proxy for the actual event).Basis risk is the risk to the insured or insurer that the  resulting payment is not commensurate with the loss.  While the main attribute of parametric insurance is the speed with which payment is made, the accompanying basis risk may mean that the insured is under-compensated for the loss. Basis risk is an issue especially for parametric insurance where, depending on the trigger mechanism, payments may significantly vary from the actual loss incurred. As a general rule, the more sophisticated the model or index that triggers the payment, the lower the basis risk. Basis risk also seems to relate to premium affordability, with pure parametric insurance producing higher basis risk, but somewhat lower premium than index or modeled parametric insurance. Applications of Catastrophe Risk  Transfer Mechanisms in Asia  and the PacificCreating a viable risk pool for the PacificThis workshop, jointly sponsored by ADB, the World Bank, and the Japan Ministry of Finance, explored how catastrophe insurance might be used in the Pacific, a region prone to natural disasters, and what actions have occurred and remain to be taken to launch such a facility. While catastrophe insurance is not by itself a solution to enhancing resilience to natural disasters, the success of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) has fueled interest in pursuing such a course in the Pacific.The CCRIF was designed to fill the financing gap between the immediate disaster response and rebuilding, a period during which government income can be reduced. Meeting government’s need for prompt funding in the aftermath of a natural disaster was the primary goal of the facility and thus a parametric insurance solution was chosen. While substantial differences exist between the Pacific islands and the Caribbean, the need for quick release of disaster funding is a common requirement. Like the CCRIF, the Pacific initiative under consideration would also be a sovereign risk facility, funding government liquidity requirements.The World Bank, in close consultation with partners including ADB, has facilitated the development of three possible approaches to creating such a facility and has organized the collection of hazard and exposure data sets for eight Pacific island countries, leading to the creation of a catastrophe risk model. The three options are: a risk pool, supported by reinsurance; a combination of risk retention, backed by a donor-based reserve fund and complemented by reinsurance; and finally, complete reliance on a donor-funded reserve pool.The key milestones to success in the Pacific are building enhanced data and collection methods, and concerted action to communicate with and educate government and 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri7   7

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




Executive SummaryNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacificviiiix

viiiix

elected officials to build a foundation of understanding and 

support. Ongoing dialogue with the commercial insurance industry is also essential. ADB can be instrumental in both 

tasks, and has already approved a $1 million technical 

assistance to build partnerships and databases. Catastrophe insurance for megacitiesThe critical issues include identifying key risk characteristics and challenges of transferring catastrophe risks in Asian megacities, and charting a course of action to launch such an initiative. Growth of Asian megacity population and economic importance has been dramatic in the past decade is  projected to continue. With this growth is a corresponding challenge to deal with the rising exposure to natural catastrophe risk. Threats of earthquake, windstorm, and flood are now joined by the possibility of rising sea levels and climate change patterns that can be accentuated in urban locations. While Asian megacities share many risk characteristics, the differences among them in terms of culture, institutions, and disaster preparedness may be too great to contemplate a traditional risk pooling mechanism. Rather, it may be preferable to formulate individual risk  transfer programs, tailored to provide coverage that  is feasible with current data quality and market preferences. Such an approach would not preclude sharing information and technical resources or even joint participation in a reinsurance structure. The main priorities for megacity catastrophe protection were identified as households (protecting economic gains at a family level); infrastructure (e.g., power, telecommunications, water); and relief and response (expedited aid to minimize loss of life and economic impact). Overall, a more proactive megacity disaster risk management will help ensure that development is sustainable. It will be important to integrate meaningful and measurable risk mitigation programs to any megacity risk transfer program, as will the close coordination of any plan with private insurers within the region and globally. ADB can facilitate the development of megacity catastrophe solutions by using a combination of its convening power and guarantee authority.ADB Framework Statement for  a Disaster Management  Public–Private PartnershipADB now has an opportunity to assume a significant facilitating role in the field of catastrophe risk finance. By sponsoring the Tokyo Conference on financing catastrophe risks, it has made a statement regarding the importance of DRM in achieving sustainable development in its member countries, and it has led by convening wide-ranging interests in catastrophe risk finance to assess opportunities for PPP.All regional development partners must consider their actions in the context of a larger regional framework for action that reflects the needs of member countries and the interests of the private sector. That framework should serve as both a platform upon which action plans can be launched, and as a broad statement of purpose under which all initiatives can reflect the shared objectives of all the framework partners. The framework could include a detailed statement of commitment to press forward with coordinated efforts to leverage its resources to bridge gaps in knowledge, research, and experience in catastrophe risk finance in Asia and the Pacific. The framework could also include an advisory committee that would meet to review individual initiatives and make  recommendations to ADB on a continuing basis. This advisory committee would be made up of regional partners, including national governments and private sector interests. Such a PPP could serve as a focal point to attract incremental capacity and risk management to the region and encourage private sector involvement. The objective would be to create a vibrant marketplace 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri8   8

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




viiiix

viiiixNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificExecutive Summary

for catastrophe risk in Asia and the Pacific, using ADB’s 

convening power and resources. All the recommendations below fit within such a framework by seeking to bridge knowledge or experience gaps identified as creating an impediment to building a full array of catastrophe risk transfer opportunities for DMCs. RecommendationsThe conference discussions identified many initiatives that could promote catastrophe risk financing in Asia and the Pacific. The following seven recommendations were the most prominent among many sound proposals. The first four appear in order of priority, based on the opinions expressed.

1. Establish a regional PPP for catastrophe risk 

finance. The partnership should link national governments and ADB programs and resources  to commercial interests in the region.This tripartite partnership should first, in a preliminary study, assess the resources, needs, and requirements of all its constituent elements, most critically the requirements of member countries. The PPP should also assure that the private sector has a sound understanding of ADB programs and capabilities. Currently, this is not the case. Also, for development partners to leverage their resources in catastrophe risk finance, they should understand better the capability and interests of the commercial market. ADB must also be able to identify the proper entry and exit points for its own resources. The study should seek to understand what the commercial market perceives as impediments to market entry, for ADB to serve as an effective catalyst.

2. Conduct an internal assessment of ADB programs 

and resources to identify actions that it could take to advance a regional catastrophe risk financing program. ADB could demonstrate its commitment to DRM “best  practices” by more aggressively managing its own catastrophe risk exposure, including assessing its catastrophe risk exposure for each project loan or guarantee, and insuring its own portfolio as a way to draw in private sector capacity to the region. It could also explore ways to spread protection benefits to DMCs by directly providing catastrophe risk protection to project loans at a small surcharge or by sponsoring a “cat bond” issue that could provide indirect benefits to DMCs by providing a debt service holiday in case of a natural disaster. ADB could also consider using its guarantee authority to backstop cat bonds issued within Asia. 

3. Establish funding for catastrophe model 

development in Asia and the Pacific as part  of a regional catastrophe risk–financing PPP.The dearth of catastrophe risk models in DMCs has impeded both the development of catastrophe risk financing opportunities and the entry of key market participants. As part of a PPP framework, ADB should initiate funding of a catastrophe model pilot project in a select area or group of countries that can demonstrate the incentive value of such models by drawing in private sector participation. It should also initiate and maintain an open-source regional data bank on catastrophe hazards and vulnerability.

4. Sponsor a small workshop focused on 

development of a megacity catastrophe risk–financing pilot program in one or two Asian  DMC cities. The four objectives of this targeted workshop are: 

(i) determine what benefits these megacities need 

to derive from a catastrophe risk scheme and how such a scheme would fit into existing DRM plans and 

institutions; (ii) analyze the specific natural catastrophe 

risk factors and parameters in one or two DMC 

megacities; (iii) discuss the relative merits of different 

risk–financing alternatives; and (iv) agree to launch a pilot project in one or more cities to establish feasibility, 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri9   9

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




Executive SummaryNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacificx

x

demonstrate the application of PPPs, and attract global risk capital. The megacity workshop would dovetail with ADB’s urban sector strategy and be consistent with its urban development objectives. 

5. Organize an educational curriculum and 

supporting programs to train DMC “chief risk officers” and others with related responsibilities.Training could be conducted primarily through web tutorials with matching printed materials. Upon completion, participants could become eligible to join an  organization of risk officers, and such training could be  linked to funding for conferences, workshops, and further training programs. ADB could convene a group of experts to work out the details of curriculum, certificates, publications, organizations, and ongoing management. The training module could be integrated with other activities in risk management, such as a megacity pilot workshop, risk modeling support, and implementation of a general catastrophe risk management framework.

6. Launch a small microinsurance catastrophe risk 

insurance pilot project in several DMCs to study issues of insurance acceptance, awareness, and relevance to the needs and concerns of ordinary people.Low insurance penetration in DMCs is attributable in  part to the absence of a relevant connection to people’s daily concerns. A pilot study such as this could reveal what natural catastrophes mean to the people most  affected. The importance of socioeconomic factors in  the acceptance of insurance has perhaps been underestimated. A microinsurance project could illuminate cultural and socioeconomic factors of insurance acceptance by building an insurance program from the ground up. 

7. Champion the adoption of uniform building 

standards throughout all DMCs.ADB has an opportunity to lead in the area of uniform and technically up-to-date building standards appropriate to catastrophe risk. As part of its Disaster Management PPP, it could work with national disaster authorities to establish a set of standards and to offer incentives to DMCs to adopt them. It should also require compliance with internationally respected building codes before a project may receive funding or other assistance.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri10   10

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




xx

Economic growth, urbanization, and the effects of global warming in Asia and the Pacific have made the region more vulnerable to natural catastrophes. When natural disasters strike, countries often face difficult choices between funding immediate basic needs and adhering to longer-term development plans. The advent of new catastrophe risk transfer mechanisms that can access global capital and reinsurance markets poses new questions and opportunities for developing countries to anticipate and manage natural catastrophe risk. Specifically, what can multilateral development banks like the Asian Development Bank (ADB) do to foster public–private partnerships to introduce new risk transfer solutions such as regional risk pooling?To understand the complexity of disaster risk management in Asia and the Pacific and to identify ways to assist member countries, in 2006, ADB undertook a regional technical assistance Development of Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms (RETA 6284). The final report recommended holding a workshop to exchange ideas and explore prospects for an Asian insurance pool. This idea was explored further with the assistance of a Japan Special Fund technical assistance for Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region (RETA 6474). In November 2008, ADB and the Japan Ministry of Finance cosponsored a conference in Tokyo to look at options for financing natural disaster losses, evaluating current risk pooling mechanisms, and reviewing lessons learned; identifying what Asia and the Pacific governments want from catastrophe insurance, and the insurers’ needs to enter such markets. Subsequent workshops explored the special needs of Asia’s megacities and the Pacific islands. Pre-conference papers prepared by specialists charted the main issues, new developments, and considerations for moving forward. Moderated panel sessions with audience participation elaborated on the topics. The by-invitation-only meeting brought together government risk managers, insurers and reinsurers, insurance brokers, financial institutions, rating agencies, development partners, multilateral development banks, and Background  and Credits

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri11   11

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




Background and CreditsNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacificxiispecialist research institutes. Resource persons included representatives from ADB; AIR Worldwide Corp;  Aon Benfield; Bloomberg; Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility; Jardine Lloyd Thompson; General Insurance Association of Japan; International Finance 

Corporation; governments of Cayman Islands, India, 

Indonesia, Japan, and the Philippines; Guy Carpenter; International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis;  Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance; Munich Re; Risk Management Solutions; Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission; Swiss Re; and World Bank Group.Overall conference development and coordination as well as conference proceedings were prepared by Peter Clark (lead consultant), Russell Blong, and Jonathan Hill under the direction of Neil Britton, senior disaster risk management specialist (Regional and Sustainable Development Department [RSDD]); Christophe Bellinger, principal guarantees and syndication specialist (Office of Cofinancing Operations); Emma Ferguson, senior country specialist (Pacific Department); and Mariflor Aunario, sector officer (RSDD). Administrative assistance was provided by Gren Saldevar-Perez (RSDD).Photographs

Cover: Christopher A. Spohr; xvi, 6, 32, 42: AFP ImageForum; 22:

 

Neil Britton; 48: ADB and World Bank. 

Pakistan Cyclone and Floods 

2007: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment, Balochistan and Sindh. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri12   12

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




xii

Adaptation Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. Basis riskThe risk that the measure of loss under an index or parametric form of insurance will not equate with the actual loss incurred.Captive insurerA subsidiary entity formed to provide insurance back to its parent. Disaster A serious disruption to the functioning of a community or a society causing widespread human, material, economic, or environmental losses that exceed the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources.Disaster risk management The systematic process of using administrative decisions, organizations, operational skills, and capacities to implement policies, strategies, and coping capacities of a society to reduce the impacts of disasters. Disaster risk reduction A series of interconnected actions to minimize disaster vulnerability by avoiding (prevention) or limiting (mitigation and preparedness) the adverse effects of hazards within the broad context of sustainable development. ExposureThe sum total of human life and physical infrastructure at risk of loss resulting from the occurrence of a particular hazard or peril. Or in the context of an insurance contract, the total of insured assets (or the sum insured) at risk of loss resulting from the occurrence of the peril insured against at any one time. Glossary of Terms

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri13   13

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificxivHazardA potentially damaging physical event, phenomenon, or human activity that may cause the loss of life or injury, property damage, social and economic disruption, or environmental degradation. IndemnityThe contractual sum due an insured from an insurer based upon the insured’s actual loss suffered.MitigationStructural and nonstructural measures, such as land use policies, undertaken to limit the adverse impact of natural hazards, environmental degradation, and technological hazards. Moral hazardThe prospect that a party insulated from risk may act in a manner adverse to the interests of a party bearing the risk, such as by acting carelessly or negligently.Parametric insuranceAn insurance contract in which payment is based on the occurrence of a specified event, as opposed to the measure of loss suffered by the insured. Parametric index insuranceAn insurance contract in which payment is based on an index as a proxy for the actual loss suffered. The index itself can be linked to objective factors such as storm intensity or location, or can be based on industry or modeled losses. ReconstructionActivities to repair and restore a disaster-damaged built environment, and which offers opportunities to develop early disaster risk–reduction measures. RecoveryDecisions and actions taken after a disaster to restore to or improve upon the pre-disaster living conditions of the impacted community, while encouraging and facilitating necessary adjustments to reduce future disaster risk. RehabilitationThe social processes that encompass decision making about restoration and reconstruction activities.  Relief or responseThe terms are used interchangeably in the literature to mean the provision of assistance or intervention during or immediately after a disaster to meet life preservation and basic subsistence needs of those affected. Duration can be immediate, short term, or extended. RiskThe probability of harmful consequences or expected loss of lives and people injured; and property, livelihoods, and economic activity disrupted (or environment damaged). This is the result of interactions between natural or human-induced hazards and vulnerable conditions. Risk transferA contractual process whereby the burden of financial loss is shifted to another party, via the use of insurance or other financing instruments, in return for a payment or premium. Risk assessmentA methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analyzing potential hazards and evaluating conditions of vulnerability that could pose a potential threat or harm to people, property, livelihoods, and the environment on which they depend. VulnerabilityConditions determined by physical, social, economic, and environmental factors that increase community susceptibility to hazard impact.Glossary of Terms

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri14   14

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




xivAcronyms  and Abbreviations

CCRIF — Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility 

DMC — developing member country

DRM — disaster risk management 

DRR — disaster risk reduction 

GFDRR — Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery

GIIF — Global Index Insurance Facility

GDP — gross domestic product

HFA — Hyogo Framework for Action

IADB — Inter-American Development Bank

ILS — insurance-linked securities 

IMF — International Monetary Fund

PPP — public–private partnership

PRC — People’s Republic of China

SOPAC — Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission

WB — The World Bank

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri15   15

7/7/2009   4:01:55 PM




Overview

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri16   16

7/7/2009   4:01:56 PM




On 4–5 November 2008, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) hosted a 

conference in Tokyo on Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific. This conference was supported by the Japan Special Fund and organized in association with the Japan Ministry of Finance and Mitsui-Sumitomo Insurance Company. Over 200 participants from 22 countries attended the conference and included ADB developing member country (DMC) representatives, government officials from Japan, representatives from the World Bank Group, international insurers, reinsurers, risk managers, and risk financing experts. The principal purpose of the conference was to build awareness among DMC representatives of  developments in catastrophe risk–financing markets that open up new possibilities to transfer natural catastrophe risk, especially when done in  conjunction with comprehensive disaster risk management (DRM) strategies. Additionally, the conference explored the development of catastrophe risk transfer facilities for the Pacific islands and for Asian megacities in two concurrent workshops held on the second day.The conference was organized around a series of background papers written for the conference and used to initiate the panel discussion of each session. These papers provided an invaluable resource for planning the conference and for its future work. For attendees, the papers provided a foundation upon which the conference discussion and debate could build. Each author presented a brief oral report on key issues or findings contained in their paper prior to the panel discussion. These papers are not reviewed individually in the conference report, but are available on ADB’s website1 along with the conference and workshop programs and biographies of resource persons who presented. A central theme underlying the conference was the question of how best ADB and other international financial institutions and regional donors can assist in facilitating the understanding of catastrophe insurance Overview1

 

www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri1   1

7/7/2009   4:01:57 PM




OverviewNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



mechanisms and the adoption of 

ex ante 

risk–financing 

and disaster risk–reduction (DRR) practices and 

mechanisms. ADB, in particular, has been considering 

ways in which it can play a catalyst role to jump-start 

ex ante 

initiatives without impeding or competing with 

possible private sector interests in the catastrophe risk–

 

insurance area. One path toward sustainable catastrophe 

risk–transfer markets is to establish public–private 

partnerships (PPP) where possible, to launch these 

initiatives. These PPPs can serve as platforms for 

market-based risk transfer solutions that can benefit from 

ADB resources and expertise, but allow the program to 

spin off as a stand-alone program. 

Another way to help advance catastrophe risk 

preparedness is to support programs to develop public 

resources such as hazard models that would be useful in 

multiple facets of disaster response, mitigation, and risk 

management.

Clearly, a key element to developing PPPs in this 

area is establishing a fundamental understanding of 

private sector interest and capability in the catastrophe 

risk–insurance area. For the donor community to partner 

with private sector interests, it must know the extent and 

nature of those interests. The private sector requires a 

better understanding of ADB programs and capabilities 

as well. To achieve this, ADB could launch an information 

campaign targeted to potential private sector partners to 

educate them about its mission and strengths.

ADB needs to consider the nature and extent of its role 

if it is going to be an active partner in this field. For 

example, it may opt to assume the role of coordinator and 

Figure 1:

 

Strengths and Weaknesses of the Public and Private Sector in Catastrophe Risk Management

ADB = Asian Development Bank.

Source: Bollmann, A. 2008. Catastrophe Risk Financing in Asia and the Pacific: A Regional Approach. A Private Sector Perspective on ADB’s Potential 

Roles in the Areas of Catastrophe Risk Financing. Paper presented at the Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region 

Conference and Workshops, Tokyo, 4–5 November. www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp

“The respective strengths and weaknesses of the public and private sectors in catastrophe risk management show areas in which 

ADB, governments, and the private sector could successfully team up and work together.”

Contributions

ADB and/or Public 

Sector

Private 

 

Sector

Raise awareness for risks and solutions

?

?

Strengthen countries’ resources for risk prevention measures and reduction in 

vulnerability to disasters

?

?

Build and/or improve “environment” for risk transfer solutions (e.g., regulatory and legal 

framework, and data series for new covers)

?

(

?

)

Enable efficient access to markets (e.g., changes in legislation, if necessary)

?

?

Develop risk transfer products and structures that address the needs most effectively

?

?

Manage and absorb risks; determine adequate risk premiums

(

?

)

?

Financial support, particularly in start-up phase and pilots

?

(

?

)

Transfer of global “best practices”

?

?

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri2   2

7/7/2009   4:01:57 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificOverview

facilitator using its deep knowledge of DMC governments, 

institutions, and development history. It could also choose to use its technical assistance authority more aggressively by funding the necessary building blocks to catastrophe risk transfer, such as market research, inventories of exposure, or catastrophe risk modeling. It could use its investment and guarantee powers by spurring the development of pilot programs with equity  or guarantee support. The conference and workshops uncovered a number of options for ADB and others to consider, for them to assist in the development of catastrophe risk transfer and risk mitigation programs. These are discussed in some detail in this report. Historical BackgroundThe widely accepted framework for natural DRM has undergone a significant shift in the past decade. An awareness of developing country vulnerability to the effects of global warming, combined with a realization of the importance of instituting comprehensive DRM strategies across all developing countries has led to a fundamental change in thinking across the international donor community. This paradigm shift has manifested itself in two fundamental areas: (i) the need to institute widespread natural disaster planning, research, and institution building to anticipate and absorb the costs that natural disasters impose on developing countries; and (ii) the realization that the status quo ante relied too heavily on post-event funding of disaster losses and not strongly enough on pre-event planning, mitigation, and risk transfer strategies. Taken together, these two changes in focus reflected a consensus among the international donor community that the prevailing paradigm in disaster assistance might not be up to the task of delivering a sufficiently robust, proactive disaster management strategy necessary to deal with the exigencies of natural hazards and global warming or to protect hard-won gains in economic development. In particular, the international donor community felt that an overreliance on ex-post disaster funding was failing to integrate DRM strategies into economic development planning generally and into national and local government planning specifically. In part, this was occurring because of inadequate attention to basic risk management skills in key government offices and underdeveloped domestic insurance infrastructure in many DMCs. Also critically missing was any coordinated effort among IFIs to spearhead incentives and programs to jumpstart ex ante DRM programs.Fundamental to the ex ante model of DRM is the growing appreciation of the opportunity costs and inefficiencies associated with post-event funding. It is now widely understood that post-event funding has the effect of deferring, and in some cases, replacing development spending already earmarked. The irony of this is that some DMCs have expressed reservations about ex ante risk mitigation and transfer programs on the basis that such spending will constitute a zero-sum transaction: what savings the country realizes from mitigation and  risk transfer will be netted out of future donor flows. In  effect, it appears that such post-event donor flows already tend to reduce or replace subsequent program funding. At this juncture, the full extent of the opportunity costs represented by post-event funding are not well understood or appreciated by DMCs or the international community and warrant further investigation.It is also well established that post-event disaster funding tends to be ill-timed and inefficiently spent. Contrary to the notion that post-event funding gets disbursed quickly and into the right hands, the fact is that such funding often tends to lag the immediate liquidity requirements of central and local governments and tends to be spent in a manner inconsistent with a hierarchy of needs. The lag and uncertainty of donor flows also has a harmful effect on fiscal planning and the investment environment generally.This realization is, in part, what led to the formulation of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction system 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri3   3

7/7/2009   4:01:57 PM




OverviewNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



Box 1: Report Highlight: Disaster Risk 

Management PrinciplesDisaster risk management (DRM) is a comprehensive, systematic approach to reducing the effects of disasters by recognizing the risks inherent within a locality, the factors that make populations vulnerable, and the means by which those risks can be minimized. DRM is based on the premise that natural hazards do not necessarily lead to disasters, but may if they affect vulnerable populations. Consequently, DRM and poverty reduction strategies should go hand in hand—especially as insufficient consideration of both may increase vulnerability to natural hazards. To emphasize this connection, the concept of disaster risk reduction was introduced to reinforce the idea that vulnerability can be lessened by controlling disaster risk. Disaster risk reduction and hazard management are therefore integral to development activities.The key elements of DRM are expressed below:

(i) Development of a legal, institutional, and 

operational framework that legitimates, consolidates, and coordinates disaster risk reduction efforts, and in particular links them to development policies.

(ii) Risk assessment to identify, analyze, and evaluate 

the types and magnitude of potential impacts faced by the Asian Development Bank’s developing member countries and that affect development investments.

(iii) Risk reduction actions designed to lessen, if not 

remove, causes of disaster.

(iv) Financial protection that includes risk transfer and 

financial options to spread financial risks over time and among different actors.

(v) Emergency preparedness and response to 

enhance a country’s readiness to cope quickly and effectively with an emergency.

(vi) Post-disaster rehabilitation and reconstruction to 

support effective recovery and to safeguard against future disasters. by the United Nations (UN) in 1999, and the development of the Hyogo Framework for Action at the UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in Kobe, Japan, in 2005. This was followed by the formation of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) in 2006. Spearheaded by the UN and the World Bank, the GFDRR is a partnership to initiate and fund comprehensive DRM strategies. As part of its Disaster and Emergency Assistance Policy, ADB has indicated its intent to explore ways to cooperate with the GFDRR in programs that operate in its DMCs. Opportunities to Use Catastrophe  Risk Finance and How ADB Could Facilitate the ProcessAs a first step toward studying how it could best implement the major objectives of the Hyogo Framework for Action, ADB initiated regional technical assistance (RETA) 6284, which reported on the “Development of Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms” in Asia (2007). The purpose of the study was to investigate catastrophe risk–insurance mechanisms and to consider ways in which ADB might play a role in increasing the availability and use of such mechanisms by DMCs in their DRM strategies.After noting the relatively weak state of DRM programs in most DMCs, the study concluded that reinsurance capacity was generally available in DMC markets, but low insurance penetration and low demand for catastrophe insurance and weak or nonexistent regulation combine to create a gap between market capability and DMC use of catastrophe risk–insurance mechanisms.The authors also surveyed the various types of risk transfer products and structures currently used. These included traditional reinsurance programs, as well as catastrophe-linked securities and derivative products. The various trigger mechanisms that can be used with catastrophe insurance were also discussed in detail. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri4   4

7/7/2009   4:01:57 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificOverview

Box 2: Report Highlight: The Hyogo Framework 

for ActionRealizing the threat that natural disasters posed to development gains, the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) was developed to establish an action plan for 2005–2015. The HFA reflected the belief that natural disaster risk management needed to be an essential component and feature of all programs and policies to ensure sustainable development. It recognized the key fact that natural catastrophes have the capability to disrupt much good work and otherwise sound policy, and unless developing countries and development organizations integrate disaster management in every phase of their work, they risk losing hard-fought development gains. More specifically, the HFA highlighted the importance of

(i) promoting the development of financial and risk-

sharing mechanisms, particularly insurance and reinsurance against disasters;(ii)

 encouraging the establishment of public–private 

partnerships to better engage the private sector in disaster risk reduction activities; encourage the  private sector to foster a culture of disaster prevention, putting greater emphasis on, and allocating resources to pre-disaster activities such as risk assessments and early warning systems; and

(iii) developing and promoting alternative and innovative 

financial instruments to address disaster risk. The HFA established several priorities for action to

(i) ensure that disaster risk reduction is a national and 

local priority with a strong institutional basis for implementation;

(ii) identify, assess, and monitor disaster risks and 

enhance early warning;

(iii) use knowledge, innovation, and education to build 

a culture of safety and resilience at all levels;

(iv) reduce the underlying risk factors; and

(v) strengthen disaster preparedness for effective 

response at all levels.The HFA also noted that regional and international organizations should consider these priorities and attempt to implement them in the context of their programs and policies, where appropriate.In particular, the paper focused on the attributes of risk pools and the benefits and problems associated with such programs. The report concluded that ADB should take the lead in advancing the understanding and deployment of catastrophe risk–financing mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific by acting as a catalyst to spur both the research and analysis of catastrophe risk in the region, and by establishing best practice standards in managing its own catastrophe risk portfolio more proactively.The report went on to recommend, among other things, that ADB sponsor a parametric catastrophe risk–pilot project in the region that could attract the attention of global markets and demonstrate the utility and methodology of a parametric catastrophe risk–transfer program for DMCs to consider.The report also recommended ADB to host a small workshop on the idea of a regional reinsurance pool and invite major market players and DMCs to assess market capability and gauge DMC interest. Given the growth in the catastrophe risk–finance market in the intervening year and the surge in interest among many parties, the scope of the workshop concept evolved into the Tokyo Conference on Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific held in early November 2008.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri5   5

7/7/2009   4:01:57 PM




6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri6   6

7/7/2009   4:02:01 PM




Overview

The fundamental objective of the conference plenary session was to alert regional developing countries, nongovernment organizations, and other regional government representatives to new opportunities to access insurance and capital markets to transfer catastrophe risk. Recognizing the possibility that many country representatives would not have opportunities to keep up with developments in catastrophe insurance products and capital markets, the conference team concluded that the first day plenary session needed to establish baseline information on catastrophe insurance and capital markets before moving on to discuss particular applications of those tools to the Pacific and megacities on the second day. To accomplish that, the first day’s proceedings were divided into four sessions, each intended to build on the preceding session and lead to a working knowledge of the basic building blocks of catastrophe risk finance. These sessions focused on leveraging insurance and capital markets against natural catastrophes; deficiencies in the commercial market’s coverage of the Asia and Pacific catastrophe risk; the foundations and purposes of catastrophe risk modeling in the region; and finally, the options available of so-called trigger mechanisms used in parametric insurance schemes.The unfolding global financial crisis colored much of the discussion at the conference and participants were asked beforehand to reflect on the impact of the crisis on catastrophe risk pricing and the availability of capital. While the credit crisis had been ongoing for a year, the import of the worldwide deterioration in equity and credit markets was only fully being recognized in the 2 months before the conference. Thus, while very much an ongoing story, some participants thought the crisis could have a very real bearing Fundamental Issues  of Catastrophe Risk Finance in Asia  and the Pacific

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri7   7

7/7/2009   4:02:02 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



on the state of the insurance and capital markets’ appetite 

for catastrophe risk while others considered the more likely outcome to be only a hardening of rates.Leveraging Insurance and Capital Markets Against Natural Catastrophes How can developing member countries benefit from new risk transfer opportunities and how have global capital markets made it easier? The objectives of this session, as outlined by the conference team, are the following:Conduct a brief survey of insurance and capital market product innovations and the state of those markets.Communicate the potential value created by the convergence of insurance and capital markets to participants and explain why this is an important development for disaster risk management (DRM) strategies.Have participants take away concrete examples of how these new hybrid products have been deployed in developing countries.Discuss the risk attributes of insurance-linked securities in light of the ongoing credit crisis and assess the relative performance of those securities.Insurance and capital markets have begun to mergeAn evolving, but nonetheless profound event in the global financial system has been the gradual convergence, or assimilation of insurance and capital markets. The panel saw the merging of what was once considered two technically and culturally distinct markets as a positive development that has had a substantial impact on the available methods of risk transfer and the pricing of that risk. The panel members also credited the merging markets for providing greater choice and price competition. This assimilation has been facilitated by ••••both a globalization of financial markets and a realization that the management of capital and the management of risk are fundamentally similar. That has permitted capital markets to underwrite and securitize traditional insurance risks and it has allowed insurance companies and those insured to access new risk bearing capacity of capital markets, which has in turn helped perfect pricing and perhaps even smoothed out insurance pricing cycles. In short, the gradual merging of markets has permitted leveraging vastly greater capital market resources against traditional catastrophe risks to enhance risk-taking capacity, improve pricing, stabilize markets, and perhaps most important, develop new risk transfer mechanisms for natural catastrophe risks traditionally dependent on more limited insurance market capability. This has been viewed as an attractive new investment opportunity for capital market investors largely because of the uncorrelated nature of the underlying risk, relative to other asset classes that tend to be directly linked to economic factors such as interest rates, economic cycles, and credit quality. To attract capital market funding, it was first necessary to develop new mechanisms with a high degree of transparency and minimal counterparty credit risk.During the conference session, the potential for capital markets to attenuate the insurance cycle and smooth pricing was discussed. The panel considered this theoretically sound, but noted that the level of premium production produced by capital market products was still only 1%–2%  of global insurance premium. The panel felt that, nonetheless, it had the potential to have a big impact on market pricing generally. However, it was also noted that capital flows in both directions and flows away from insurance products could have the opposite effect on pricing. The panel was particularly interested in the applicability of capital market risk transfer solutions to governments. Capital market products offer special advantages to governments seeking to buy catastrophe protection because of their ability to self insure large exposures and bring a diverse portfolio of risks to the market. Panelists noted that the Asia and Pacific governments should be 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri8   8

7/7/2009   4:02:02 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

Box 3: Report Highlight: Insurance-Linked Financial Products

The convergence of insurance and capital markets is best epitomized by the development of a market for issuing and trading securities derived from insurance instruments. Insurance-linked securities (ILS) and related financial products allow the transfer of insurance risk to capital markets by contractual agreement. Examples of ILS and financial products include catastrophe bonds, sidecars, and industry loss warranties. Catastrophe bonds are securities that transfer defined catastrophe risks to investors via bond instruments. A special purpose vehicle established on behalf of the sponsor most often issues catastrophe bonds. Typically, the bonds are floating rate instruments, the principal of which is used to pay off losses in the event of a specified catastrophic event. Side cars are securities issued to investors that have opted to participate proportionately in an insurer’s book of business. Much like a quota-share reinsurance contract, investors accept a share of losses for a like share of premium, less commissions for expenses. Industry loss warranties are contracts that transfer risk based on a measure of loss to the entire insurance industry, not to the particular insured. Insurance loss warranties are commonly executed as reinsurance contracts, but they may also be structured as securities or derivatives.The ILS market has often been used by insurers to buy protection for high severity, low probability risks to supplement or replace traditional reinsurance at very high levels in a reinsurance structure. Used in this manner, ILS contracts allow insurers access to incremental capacity at attractive pricing. Driving the development of the ILS market on the other side have been capital market investors, quick to fill a capacity gap and diversify their portfolios with risks not correlated to financial and credit-related risks already on their books. A major factor in the growth of the ILS market has been the liquidity depth of capital markets. In the current environment, it is anticipated that capital market appetite for ILS products may be substantially reduced, albeit probably only temporarily. What is clear is that the secondary trading market for these securities has slowed to a crawl in the absence of broader credit market activity. However, it is expected that the ILS market will rebound in conjunction with a thaw in the credit environment generally, especially if reinsurance rates harden as expected over the course of 2009–2010.in the market buying protection for the poor, repairing infrastructure damage, and aiding in building critical new capacity in developing country insurance markets.How is the catastrophe risk market responding to the global credit crisis?The panel agreed that while activity in insurance-linked securities (ILS) markets had slowed, there seemed to be no fundamental changes or long-term adverse consequences for the ILS market as a result of continued turmoil in global financial markets. The exception to that appeared, not surprisingly, to be in the higher cost of capital. However, there did appear to be agreement on the fact that the predicted superior performance of ILS in a period of market turmoil was proving to be true. It had long been argued that the uncorrelated nature of natural catastrophe risk securities, relative to other asset classes underwritten by capital markets, coupled with the transparent nature of those risks, would lend stability to those securities in troubled times. The panel agreed that this was happening in practice, although new issuance of these securities was being constrained by the higher cost of capital. However, risk spreads and yields appeared to holding up well. Specifically, it was noted that since March of 2007, the Standard & Poors 500 Index was 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri9   9

7/7/2009   4:02:02 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific1011

1011

Box 4: Report Highlight: Credit Crisis Update

As already noted, the conference occurred during a particularly turbulent period of the unfolding and deepening credit crisis. While many participants addressed the impact of the crisis on the state of catastrophe risk insurance markets, much has happened since that time to clarify its potential impact. To capture the most current thinking on the impact of the crisis, the conference organizers polled a number of participants and market experts to gauge their sentiment on the state of the markets and the outlook for 2009. Not surprisingly, there was a range of views on the state of the markets and the prognosis for the coming year. While most participants agreed that catastrophe reinsurance rates were hardening as a result of 2008 losses, reduced portfolio asset values, and the rising cost of risk capital, they disagreed on the implications of rising catastrophe rates. Some noted that rising rates did not correlate well with underwriting results and hence were not fully justified.Others noted that higher rates were part of the mending process that would restore reinsurance balance sheets and promote more discipline in allocating and pricing of capital. Others observed that 1/1 renewal rates for catastrophe risks were actually flat to 2008, even in the United States market, but that additional layers or new business was more difficult to place.It was also noted that the credit crisis had helped shift the catastrophe bond market toward an investor-driven, as opposed to issuer-driven market. The significance of this shift has been seen in a diminished investor interest by those without insurance specialization (e.g., hedge funds) and a heightened interest by those investors with insurance expertise. The practical import of this may be a corresponding increase in indemnity trigger bonds and a decrease in parametric trigger bonds, since the transparency of the parametric trigger—so important to capital markets—is of less value to those investors with the ability to manage the indemnification process.It was also noted that the failure of Lehman Brothers had created some turmoil in the catastrophe bond market, given their role as a guarantor of collateral investor funds. Hence, even though the underlying risk being transferred remained uncorrelated to financial asset classes, it had nonetheless been caught up in the credit crisis, thus tarnishing to some degree the claim that catastrophe bonds are both uncorrelated and free of credit risk.In summary, the general conclusions of the group polled were the following:

1) Catastrophe pricing will increase as a result of 2008 losses and the need to strengthen balance sheets, but catastrophe risk 

capacity will not likely be substantially reduced, and renewal business may not be affected dramatically.

2) Despite setbacks in the catastrophe bond and insurance-linked securities market, participation by capital markets in 

catastrophe risk financing is here to stay, but the absence of capital market liquidity would be a meaningful constraint to new issues in 2009.

3) Reinsurers could face a serious challenge in replenishing capital in a locked-down credit market in the event of major 

catastrophic losses in 2009.

4) The credit market turmoil underscores the need to create a more robust and reliable catastrophe risk financing structure within 

Asia and the Pacific that is stable and prepared to respond to regional needs.trading down 37%, the BB (investment grade) Corporate Bond Lehman Index was trading down 18%, and the Swiss Re BB Catastrophe Bond Index was trading up 9.7% in the same period. As regards the impact of the financial crisis on catastrophe risk transfer more generally, the panel noted that reinsurers had been hit particularly hard by declining asset values and that the resulting increase in cost of 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri10   10

7/7/2009   4:02:02 PM




1011

1011Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

capital could translate into increased prices. They noted, 

however, that even with depressed portfolio values, most reinsurers’ premium to surplus ratios were still more than adequate.On the regulation of the global ILS market, the panel believed that additional regulation was essential. While minimal regulation of the derivatives market was seen as a positive attribute that had helped produce low transaction costs, the failure of adequate supervision and the scale of the market has since demonstrated the need for global international standards. And within Asia, where such regulation has a weaker footing, it is even more imperative that such efforts be made. It was noted that regional development partners could play a significant role in encouraging regulatory authorities in Asia and the Pacific to comply with global standards. However, while ILS often include a derivative component, they are normally collateralized to the maximum possible loss amount and hence are quite distinct from credit-linked derivatives.Are There Deficiencies in the Commercial Insurance Market’s Coverage of the Asia and Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Does Risk Pooling Bridge the Gap?The objectives and questions to be answered in this session, as outlined by the conference team, are the following:Establish a consensus on whether there is a gap to be filled and if so, is the gap a function of demand or supply side factors?From the developing country side, how is the gap viewed and where do these countries see limitations of the commercial market contributing to the shortfall? From the commercial market’s side, what are the systemic obstacles within countries to creating demand or establishing the necessary prerequisites to writing catastrophe coverage in these countries?•••Which of these aspects of market gaps can the ADB effectively address?Is there a gap between what developing member countries require to better manage catastrophe risk and what insurance markets are prepared  to offer?The panelists generally agreed that a reasonably priced catastrophe risk capacity was available for Asia and the Pacific. However, this fact highlights the paradox of having ample capacity at historically low prices during a period of very low catastrophe risk–insurance penetration. In other words, if capacity and cost is not the cause of a coverage gap, then where do we look for answers?One observation was that from a government perspective, a key factor leading to low levels of acceptance is that catastrophe insurance often fails to  address fatalities. It was noted that protection of livelihoods and human life itself might often be more relevant to developing country-disaster management needs than the protection of government assets or private infrastructure. By focusing exclusively on property damage, catastrophe insurance may reduce its relevance to national governments that are more concerned about the loss of human life. Expanding the focus to include fatalities could be one way to address the demand-side weakness and help bridge the gap.A panelist also observed that there was a significant gap between the market and demand even in Japan. He noted that in the event of an extremely large earthquake in Japan resulting in roughly $1 trillion of losses, only 10% of the loss would currently be covered by insurance. He also noted that even with widespread popular understanding of quake risk in Japan, it was difficult to sell such coverage, with only about a 22% penetration of households in Japan. Several other explanations for the gap were suggested, including the possibility that the hazards typically addressed by catastrophe insurance sometimes failed •

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri11   11

7/7/2009   4:02:02 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific11

11

Figure 2: Example of a Risk Pool

RLS = restructured loans, SPV = special purpose vehicle.Source: Hill, J. 2008. Leveraging Insurance and Capital Markets against Natural Catastrophes. Paper presented at the Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region Conference and Workshops, Tokyo, 4–5 November. www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe -Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp“A basic example of a pooling mechanism. The pooling entity or ‘pass-through vehicle’ is owned by members and/or policyholders and may be funded through outside equity investors or governments as well. In this example, the pool accesses the traditional reinsurance market and obtains additional capitalization through risk-linked securities issued a small amount at a time through a shelf program.”

A

B

C

D

E

F

Equity investment ormembership feesOutside equityinvestorsReinsuranceReinsurersRLS investors(SPV)Shelf issuancelinked toaggregatedcontractsInsurancepolicies orparametriccontractsInsurancecompany or risk transfer entity(pass-through vehicle)Poolmembers

to address the hazard ultimately causing the greatest 

loss. At least one panelist suggested that typhoon and earthquake risk were only part of the hazard mix that the commercial market needed to address. The secondary hazards spawned by typhoon and earthquake, such as landslides, floods, and tsunami, were possibly the hazards of greater concern to developing countries but not always adequately addressed by the market.Insurance affordabilityCatastrophe risk insurance premium is often deemed to  be too expensive by developing countries. It is true that  catastrophe risk premiums sometimes reflect high multiples of expected losses, since the underlying events tend to be high severity and low incidence, thus necessitating a high capital charge for the extremity of  the event. Therefore, the cost of capital to reserve against catastrophes can be a major driver of catastrophe insurance costs and can render the insurance “unaffordable” without necessarily making the insurance mispriced. Also affecting affordability in developing countries, relative to rates in developed countries, are lower construction standards and higher levels of moral hazard as regards claims handling. But it was by no means agreed, notwithstanding assertions of historically low-catastrophe risk pricing in 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri12   12

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




11

11Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

Asia and the Pacific, that such insurance was deemed 

sufficiently affordable by developing countries. This was seen as a gap in and of itself. Catastrophe risk–insurance pricing relative to historic insurance pricing benchmarks is a vital indicator to gauge the state of the market, but to assess affordability of catastrophe risk premium in developing countries may require a different metric. For example, a suggestion was made that the socioeconomic issues should be weighed first before discussing affordability of catastrophe insurance. To do that, it would first be necessary to ask two fundamental questions: what do catastrophes do to people and what benefits do poor people in particular want to  see from catastrophe insurance? It was suggested that one way to achieve that ground-level view would be via  a microinsurance pilot project. Such a pilot project  would require a sharp focus on what people really want  from catastrophe insurance and would reflect real socioeconomic issues that affect people’s lives.Should international financial institutions and donors reduce the cost of insurance and what  would be the effect of doing so?Some panelists thought some degree of financial incentives were important to jump-start the process, but that premium subsidies were inadvisable given their tendency to distort market pricing and make long-term program commitments more difficult. It was noted that the experience of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) indicated that some degree of premium subsidy had proven helpful in forging regional catastrophe risk mechanisms, but that the trade-off is the need to wean the recipients off the subsidy later, which can prove difficult. In this context, a participant observed that the idea of subsidizing premium suggests knowledge of the proper price for catastrophe risk in developing countries. He argued that since insurance is so underdeveloped in  these countries and catastrophe risk data are so inadequate, the question of what constitutes a subsidy is inherently unanswerable at this point.What can ADB do to facilitate access to catastrophe risk transfer?It was broadly agreed that there was ample opportunity for ADB to play a critical role in the development of catastrophe risk insurance in Asia and the Pacific. A panelist stated that ADB had enormous power to promote the adoption of catastrophe risk insurance. He noted that it has deep and longstanding relationships with its member countries and is in a unique position 

Box 5: Report Highlight: Insured Catastrophe 

Losses in 2008According to Swiss Re, 2008 was the second costliest year in terms of catastrophe losses for insurance firms worldwide. In all, the total volume of claims on natural and man-made disasters amounted to $50 billion, almost double the amount from the previous year. In total, catastrophes worldwide (insured and uninsured) caused $225 billion of damage, with natural disasters generating $43 billion of claims. Man-made disasters, such as fire and explosions, generated $7 billion of claims. The vast majority of all catastrophe losses worldwide remain uninsured, especially in the developing world where insurance penetration is extremely low.In 2008, catastrophes caused more than 238,000 fatalities, with over 90% of the total occurring as a result of cyclone Nargis in Myanmar and the Sichuan earthquake in the People’s Republic of China. Overall, it was noted that developing countries absorbed  a larger proportion of natural disaster losses in 2008  than in the previous year, thus resulting in a relatively small percentage of losses covered by insurance worldwide (22%).

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri13   13

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific11

11

to build understanding of the benefits of catastrophe 

risk insurance and also bridge the differences among countries when forming regional schemes. For example, ADB is in a prime position to use its convening power to build the political will to accept the cross-subsidization of losses in a regional scheme. This could be achieved once ADB had built a sound understanding within the region of the value of catastrophe risk insurance. The panel noted how important the success of ADB’s initial efforts would be. Finding a scheme that works will help build momentum to replicate the success in more challenging locations later. For example, it could initiate a regional data bank on catastrophe hazards and vulnerability that would be open for all to access. There was also consensus that ADB should lead by  example and develop better catastrophe risk management of its own loan portfolio. There were two obvious benefits to this idea: (i) the institution would be  exercising the prudent management of its own catastrophe risk; and (ii) it would be addressing the harmful follow-on effects of disasters on its own lending resources following a catastrophic event. Insuring such risk into the private sector would help eliminate the opportunity costs to its own mission resulting from 

Box 6: Report Highlight: The Inter-American Development Bank Approach 

 to Ex Ante Disaster Risk ManagementThe Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) is in the process of developing ex ante disaster risk management (DRM) programs for several countries in Central America. Its approach to the development of these mechanisms differs, in several important respects, to the work being done by other multilateral development banks in other regions. The principal departure in the IADB approach is to bypass initially the regional catastrophe risk–pooling concept, at the first tier insurance level, in favor of developing a menu of financial instruments that can be shaped to an individual country’s particular needs, instead of relying solely on risk–transfer instruments. IADB perceives significant value in developing DRM capabilities by country. First, such an approach assures that the resulting program is tailored precisely to the country’s DRM requirements and capabilities. Second, it provides the country with a track record and market presence vis-à-vis capital markets and reinsurers.  And third, IADB believes that reinsurance market pricing implicitly provides much of the economic advantages of risk pooling, particularly when the size of coverage is limited and/or the risks in the eventual pool are significantly correlated.The IADB strategy calls for an integrated, multifaceted program to be devised for each country that may include (i) prevention and mitigation measures, (ii) contingent credit facilities providing immediate liquidity to absorb medium probability and/or medium-level losses, (iii) insurance of low probability and/or high losses, and (iv) ex post financing of extremely low probability and/or catastrophic losses. This structure includes a degree of credit enhancement by IADB, in particular through the contingent credit facility that may improve the ability of a country with low credit to access global markets on favorable terms.Another significant feature of the IADB approach is to structure insurance coverage through captive insurance entities established by the country authorities and managed by independent administrators and auditors. The purpose of the captive structure is to provide governments with improved access to insurance and reinsurance markets. IADB is also in the process of forging public–private partnerships between governments in Central America and a private international insurer.IADB sees risk mitigation and natural DRM planning as being integral parts of any national strategy and is prepared to provide nonreimbursable technical assistance funding to support the development of the domestic insurance market, regulatory strengthening, and risk management programs.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri14   14

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




11

11Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

natural catastrophes. Finally, the panelists agreed that 

ADB can provide technical assistance to developing countries in terms of feasibility analysis of different insurance schemes, fund data collection to build up the regional infrastructure necessary to attract insurers, and ultimately facilitate the development of efficient insurance markets in the region.Building Blocks of Catastrophe Insurance: Catastrophe Risk Models —Their Purpose and ImportanceThe objectives of this session, as outlined by the conference team, were as follows: Establish a baseline understanding of catastrophe risk modeling for those unfamiliar with the field.Outline the challenges and impediments to catastrophe risk modeling and catastrophe risk data collection generally in Asia and the Pacific.Explore who is best prepared both to do the work and pay for it.What are the basics of catastrophe modeling?This session began with a review of the fundamental purpose and methodologies behind catastrophe loss models. Catastrophe modeling is fundamental to how catastrophe risk management is undertaken and is used for pricing, structuring, and transferring risk to insurance and capital markets. Panel participants explained that the two critical functions of catastrophe models are to establish risk pricing and to correlate the portfolio. The portfolio correlation yields information on the potential for multiple locations to be affected by a single or compound hazard event. This function ties directly into one of the most important concepts behind insurance: diversification. Assessing correlated risk helps promote the spread of risk so that a single event will not result in losses to a substantial proportion of a portfolio of risks. •••The pricing information derives from taking the losses from the full range of possible events and from applying the expected rate of occurrence of that event to yield an expected loss figure. Both functions are achieved by (i) generating a broad universe of hypothetical hazard events with appropriate magnitudes, frequencies, and locations; (ii) identifying a portfolio of assets that could be damaged, together with their values and locations; (iii) assessing the vulnerabilities of those assets as percentages of their values, summing the potential losses from each event; and (iv) ranking the potential losses in the form of an exceedence probability curve.Catastrophe modeling in Asia and the Pacific:  What are the issues in building catastrophe models?Of particular interest to the panel was the prospect of developing catastrophe risk models in areas within Asia and the Pacific where such models had not been attempted or were incomplete.The panel agreed that it was critical to invest the proper talent and funds into developing and maintaining these models. In particular, the panel noted that catastrophe model outcomes are extraordinarily sensitive to the parametersused. For example, in windstorm models, a 1% increase in wind speed could produce a 7% increase in loss. The suggested implications of this sensitivity was that scaled-down modeling efforts are likely to yield significantly less valuable models that are less likely to produce accurate results and will fail to win the confidence of insurance and capital markets. The succinct message was: do not sacrifice the quality of the model when moving into new geographies.The panel also reiterated the point expressed earlier that current catastrophe models were not well adapted to the most relevant hazards impacting Asia and the Pacific. In particular, flood is probably the most critical hazard in need of modeling for the region, yet it remains the most challenging. Recent advances in remote sensing 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri15   15

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific1617

1617

technology provide opportunities to develop index 

insurance programs by mapping and then monitoring known flood reaches, but more work needs to be done before a marketable model is available for developing countries.In this context, it was noted that in Asia and the Pacific, many typhoon fatalities result from landslide and storm surge and in the Pacific, earthquake fatalities often result from tsunami—yet most models focus on wind speed and ground shaking. Thus, modeling efforts need to be refocused to include secondary impacts to capture relevant loss data that may better reflect concerns of countries in the region. It was noted that in the Pacific islands, choosing the correct hazard to model would depend on the purpose of the modeling exercise. For example, if the aim is to protect human life or to fund emergency loss expenses, the choice will decide what hazard to focus on. The former may be better linked to flood or landslide and the latter to windstorm.The panelists generally agreed that asset values in the  Pacific area were not big enough to warrant the commercial market to fund the cost of catastrophe modeling. A panelist declared that where there is a will, sufficiently large insured values, and a business case to be made, then catastrophe models would follow. It was noted that presently, those conditions prevail in very few countries in the region and virtually none in the Pacific. The costs of developing catastrophe models are not only out of reach for many smaller countries, the cost of establishing and maintaining such models with timely and accurate data collection is also quite high. Clearly, such data collection and management is essential for developing risk-financing schemes, yet the historical record in the Pacific, for instance, is often incomplete  and internal funding is scarce for such things as maintenance of weather stations and hazard databases. Development banks can play a critical role in enabling DRM strategies to move forward by funding such modeling and data collection efforts. Doing so could pave the way for these risk-financing programs to win acceptance in global insurance and capital markets by providing the necessary DRM infrastructure funded on a continuing and sustainable basis.Risk mitigation: The importance of reducing  the impact of disasters and the benefits of mitigationSeveral participants emphasized that no country can  engineer a viable insurance scheme without risk mitigation. As noted by previous speakers, a risk transfer mechanism without a risk mitigation regime is simply not viable in any market, especially in a developing region where there is less reliable data and fewer participants. Often, an appreciation of this holistic approach to DRM is missing when proposals are made to transfer catastrophe risk in developing countries. A risk must first be deemed insurable before a catastrophe risk–transfer program is considered, and to do that most effectively, risk mitigation should be integrated into the country’s DRM plan. Catastrophe modeling can be used as an effective risk mitigation tool and can be used to encourage mitigation to reduce risk. For example, catastrophe risk modeling can be used to enhance building code or land use reforms. Models can help inform governments about the loss reduction attributable to specific improvements (e.g., storm shutters) or can instruct where not to build to avoid hazards. What are the roles for multilateral development finance institutions?An important question put to the panel was how the cost of catastrophe modeling is to be met when the immediate rewards to commercial insurers and modelers are low. It was agreed that catastrophe modeling in the developing regions of Asia and all the Pacific islands was too expensive to be justified by commercial modelers. One solution aired was the notion of an open-source model that could be devised and maintained (both the code and  the product) for common use. The advantage of this 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri16   16

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




1617

1617Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

would be lower initial and ongoing costs. The downside, 

as noted by the panel, could be that the quality of the data and maintenance could be substandard.There was broad agreement that development banks and/or agencies could be in the best position to “prime the pump” for catastrophe model development and maintenance. ADB could fund a development platform that could begin building data collection infrastructure (e.g., wind stations) in key locations and data maintenance capability. The collection of loss data is also vital to validate model results. ADB could also fund the building of a catastrophe model that is used as a community resource within the region that can then be sustained by the data collection network already in place. In this way, ADB could provide the missing link in the development of a catastrophe risk model for Asia and the Pacific and play a major role as a catalyst to break one of the key logjams in DRM in the region.Catastrophe Insurance Triggers: What is the Best Fit for Asia and the Pacific?  Why Does It Matter? What Initiates a Payment under a Catastrophe Risk Insurance Policy?The objectives of this session, as outlined by the conference organizers, are the following:Review the basics of catastrophe insurance triggers in the context of parametric insurance mechanisms, especially as they relate to pricing and affordability. Provide examples and case studies to demonstrate the applications of these triggers in actual parametric programs.Present the International Finance Corporation’s pending Global Index Insurance Facility (GIIF) and explain its relevance to Asia and the Pacific’s DRM efforts.•••Background informationThe panel covered the essential foundations of catastrophe insurance triggers and the specific applications of certain trigger mechanisms in practice (CCRIF) and in theory (Asia and the Pacific). Prefacing that discussion was a brief survey of trigger types and their applications. 

1. 

Indemnity. This is the traditional method of triggering payment under an insurance policy and involves presentation of proof of actual loss suffered. It is often called a perfect hedge, but it too has some degree of basis risk.

2. 

Pure parametric. Payment is made based on the occurrence of a pre-defined event, not the resulting loss. Basis risk is high, given the pure proxy role of the event itself.

3. 

Parametric index. Instead of paying strictly based on the occurrence of an event, this trigger pays based on an agreed index or formula (an objective, external measure) as a proxy for likely losses. The CCRIF operates with a parametric index trigger. Basis risk is lower than in a pure parametric trigger.

4. 

Modeled loss. Instead of using an index, this trigger uses a peril model that will ascribe losses and probabilities based on model inputs. With a quality model, basis risk is reduced further.

5. 

Industry index. Payment is triggered by total market losses exceeding a certain level. This is not applicable to developing country markets given the lack of data. Basis risk: What is it and why does it matter?Basis risk is the risk that the recovery under an insurance contract does not equate to the loss incurred. Basis risk can cut in both directions with the insured being less than fully compensated for his loss and the  insurer paying out less, or the insured being made more than whole and the insurer’s payment exceeding 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri17   17

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific11

11

the actual loss. Basis risk is present in all insurance 

transactions and is vital to understand since it tends to be accentuated in parametric mechanisms. That is so because parametric mechanisms seek to use the loss event as a proxy for the loss itself and utilize modeled losses or indexes as the basis for compensation, as opposed to loss calculations that are based on actual assessments. By definition, even highly sophisticated modeled losses can never precisely align with actual losses, thus creating some degree of basis risk. Indemnity policies create basis risk as well by dint of deductibles and other contract terms. The key reasons that the insured and insurers accept basis risk in the context of parametric catastrophe insurance is because (i) it eliminates potentially long administrative delays in getting funds into the hands of those buying protection for emergency aid; (ii) when insuring sovereign assets, the determination of loss can be difficult since exposure data can be hard to obtain or unreliable, thus rendering indemnity policies difficult to underwrite; (iii) since governments have some element of control over losses they suffer, a certain degree of moral hazard exists when insuring sovereign assets, again often rendering indemnity policies impractical; and (iv) there is a trade-off between basis risk and price, with higher basis risk parametric products (pure parametric) tending to be less expensive than lower basis risk products (modeled parametric). The panel was also concerned about who should bear basis risk. One view was that from a political standpoint, the consumer must be protected from basis risk. Under this view, it was considered unfair for a householder or farmer to bear this risk when they had relied on the insurance protection, only to see the insurance fail to cover the loss adequately or perhaps not respond at all. Possible solutions suggested by the panel members included: having catastrophe insurance schemes or scheme sponsors bear basis risk; seeking to have basis risk reinsured as part of the total risk transfer structure (where primary coverage is provided by capital markets and basis risk cover is written by reinsurance markets); and seeking to use indemnity covers where affordable. The choice of triggers affect  the cost of insuranceThe panel noted serious issues of affordability that tied back to discussion from an earlier panel on the wisdom and need for incentives, particularly premium subsidies. Sentiment was expressed from the audience that perhaps objections to premium subsidies were misplaced. The question posed was: “What is wrong with subsidizing premium on the front-end of the process since governments are usually forced to reallocate resources after a natural catastrophe to aid the poor in any event?”The panel stated that it is difficult to generalize about the impact of different trigger mechanisms on affordability and their respective impacts on basis risk. At the most general level, it can be said that the “commoditization” effect of capital markets pricing of parametric triggers can produce savings over traditional indemnity insurance products especially when it involves a significant amount of co-insurance. Yet, parametric trigger mechanisms produce countervailing basis risk that can add to the net loss to an insured. Nonetheless, it can be said that basis risk diminishes the more sophisticated the parametric trigger, although as noted  in the comments below on the CCRIF case study, even  with a parametric index trigger, significant basis risk —and hence costs—can remain. Within the catastrophe bond market specifically, the panel noted that from 2003 to 2007, virtually no indemnity triggers were used for non-United States bonds and as a rule, pure parametric triggers were about 15% less expensive than indexed or modeled bonds.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri18   18

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




11

11Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

Some examples of how trigger mechanisms can 

help shape catastrophe risk transfer programsThe Caribbean Catastrophe  Risk Insurance Facility The panel noted that the timing of receipt of disaster aid funds was the key driver behind the formation of the CCRIF. Some form of parametric trigger was therefore recommended. The parametric-index option was chosen for the CCRIF in part to reduce basis risk. Rather than key payments off the loss event itself, a formula index was created as a proxy to the loss event that would estimate the likely losses in an earthquake or hurricane. To do this, within each member country, reference points were established based on population and exposure values. At each such point, the formula incorporates measures of wind speed or ground shaking followed by the application of a formula to derive expected loss amounts. (A more complete description of CCRIF operations is found on 

p. 24.)

MAIPARKThe panel discussed the relative merits of different trigger mechanisms as they pertain to MAIPARK (the commercial pool of earthquake risks written within Indonesia) and the National Disaster Management Program of Indonesia. It was noted that the primary task of these programs is to get cash into the hands of the people most affected by the disaster within 2 weeks. This is the critical task in the eyes of the Government of Indonesia, and as such, a parametric trigger is being studied as a means to speed funds to those in need. Currently, all MAIPARK insurance programs are indemnity based. However, basis risk associated with parametric triggers can be difficult if not impossible in a country like Indonesia with insurance penetration of under 1% of gross domestic product and with a lack of general insurance awareness. Politically, it could be very difficult for the government to explain to the public and elected officials why funds spent on insurance protection did not produce the protection when the disaster struck. Indonesia recognizes that it cannot allow itself to be in  such a situation, and therefore, a hypothetical compromise might be to combine parametric triggers with indemnity triggers. Parametric insurance could be deployed at a level that can be justified by pricing and affordability, but at the lower levels of the program, the government believes that the insurance must remain indemnity based.The Global Index Insurance FacilityThe International Finance Corporation presented a brief  summary of a new index reinsurance facility now in its formative stages. The Global Index Insurance Facility (GIIF) as proposed is to be comprised of a reinsurance vehicle intended to originate, intermediate, and underwrite weather that could be indexed, catastrophe, and commodity price risks in developing countries. In addition, the GIIF will have a funding vehicle dedicated to the development of local insurance markets, capacity building and technical assistance for the development of ex ante risk transfer mechanisms and catastrophe risk–modeling expertise among other endeavors. It was stated that one of the important functions of the GIIF would be to create intermediaries on the ground within developing countries. It was noted that while capacity for catastrophe risks globally is considered adequate at the moment, too little of this capacity is coming out of the developed world to be used in the developing world. Hence, the potential real value of the GIIF would be to create risk markets in the developing world by focusing on local capacity building to get insurance companies and other intermediaries in developing countries to become stakeholders and begin to write catastrophe coverage. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri19   19

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




Fundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific0

0

Are there special considerations in Asia and the 

Pacific affecting the choice of triggers?The applicability of these trigger mechanisms to catastrophe risk in Asia and the Pacific is impacted by the lack of adequate peril models in many territories as well as the difficulties in gathering market and historical loss data. The implication of the former is that the cost and lead time necessary to structure these programs may be substantial and that either traditional reinsurance or pure parametric or parametric index may be the preferred course. Also, it was noted by the panel that the need for better and more sophisticated modeling is even greater when using parametric or parametric index triggers. This is  because with these triggers, the uncertainty in the catastrophe risk–transfer transaction is retained by the buyer, as opposed to indemnity transactions where all the uncertainty is retained by the reinsurer. This raises the stakes within Asia and the Pacific of generating quality models to reduce basis risk.Key ideas for forming a framework approach to better disaster risk management in Asia and the Pacific and how ADB can best facilitate its developmentMarket research assessing the scope of private market interest. For regional development partners to leverage their finite resources wisely and to act as a catalyst to attract private sector capital and expertise, it is essential to understand better the capability and interests of commercial market participants. Achieving a better understanding of what the private market is prepared to do and why, is critical to shaping this catalyst role. •Research opportunity costs of both post-event funding as well as ex ante funding. More work is required to assess the follow-on effects of both ex ante and post-event catastrophe funding. The possible unintended consequences of each must be better understood for policy makers to make informed decisions regarding catastrophe risk–financing.Lack of adequate catastrophe models. The  development and maintenance costs of catastrophe risk models have been impediments to more effective DRM in Asia and the Pacific. Coupled with the difficulty of obtaining consistent and reliable data, this has hindered catastrophe risk finance opportunities. International financial institutions need to consider ways to sustainably fund such activities.Catastrophe risk and/or insurance awareness. The low level of insurance penetration in developing countries was in part attributed to  a lack of popular awareness of both the vulnerability to catastrophe risk as well as the existence of possible insurance solutions. Regional development partners could launch awareness campaigns and begin to incorporate catastrophe risk reviews as part of their normal project assessment process.Develop a PPP for catastrophe risk pooling. ADB is in a unique position to use its convening power and loan and guarantee functions to establish a PPP-based platform to support catastrophe risk financing in the region. Such a PPP could serve as a transitional mechanism to bridge the gap between country needs and commercial market capabilities. The platform could serve as the basis for numerous endeavors, including a pilot program for Asian megacity risk.••••

1

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri20   20

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




0

0Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificFundamental Issues of Catastrophe Risk  Finance in Asia and the Pacific

Microinsurance. 

A microinsurance pilot project could begin to address issues of low acceptance of catastrophe insurance in regional developing countries. By building insurance awareness from the ground up, the needs and values of ordinary people would begin to be reflected in catastrophe insurance products and acceptance rates could rise significantly.ADB to develop catastrophe risk best practices standard. By more aggressively managing its own catastrophe risk exposure within its loan portfolio, ADB could set an example to its member countries of how to better manage risk. By doing so, ADB could foster insurance industry interest in the region. It could also consider ways ••to share the protection benefits with its borrowers in the event of a natural disaster that impacts loan repayments.Fund feasibility of catastrophe risk–financing options for individual countries. Existing DRM programs and institutions differ markedly from country to country within Asia and no single catastrophe risk financing solution fits all countries’ cultures and approaches to DRM. ADB and other international financial institutions could support studies within individual member countries to ascertain the catastrophe risk–financing strategies that fit well with that country’s existing DRM framework and culture.•1

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri21   21

7/7/2009   4:02:03 PM




6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri22   22

7/7/2009   4:02:06 PM




Overview

This workshop was jointly organized by ADB, Japan’s Ministry of Finance, and the World Bank. It had three broad objectives: (i) to generate a better understanding of how catastrophe insurance is relevant to the Pacific;  (ii) to create a better understanding of what initial actions have been taken  to advance catastrophe insurance in the Pacific; and (iii) to facilitate discussion of possible future actions and options in support of catastrophe insurance in the Pacific.Opening AddressesIn its opening remarks, ADB made clear its commitment to understand better how gaps can be bridged to develop proactive disaster preparedness. Currently, ADB capitalizes on the comparative advantages of the respective institutions and synergies with the private sector to develop the most efficient support for governments. The central question is, how can the Pacific strengthen its resilience to natural disasters? While catastrophe insurance is not the complete answer, it may help governments with the immediate liquidity needed following a disaster. For its part, the World Bank recognizes that the Pacific islands are exposed to a wide range of natural catastrophes and the significant impact these have on people’s lives and economic performance in small economies. There is now a greater awareness of the need to adapt to natural disasters and to acknowledge climate change. But while adaptation is an important policy ingredient, it is neither a complete nor sufficient solution for major disasters. Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificCreating a Viable Risk Pool for the Pacific

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri23   23

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



Figure 3: Trend in Annual Reports of Natural Disasters in the Pacific IslandsSource: Blong, R. 2008. The Special Nature of Disaster Risk in the Pacific. Paper presented at the Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region Conference and Workshops, Tokyo, 4–5 November. www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp“While several studies purport to show an increase in natural disaster losses, the most careful analyses indicate increased losses result from societal changes and changes in values at risk.”Collective risk pooling in the Pacific has been given fresh impetus by the success of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). The CCRIF was designed to fill the financing gap between the immediate disaster response and rebuilding, a period during which government income may be reduced. The World Bank’s experience with catastrophe risk financing and significant in-house technical expertise led the Pacific islands to invite the World Bank to examine risk pooling. To date, the World Bank has identified three possible approaches: (i) regional pooling of country risks supported by reinsurance markets, (ii) establishment of donor catastrophe reserve funds, or (iii) a combination of a regional reserve with access to the reinsurance market in the case of infrequent events. With an expanded awareness of the value ex ante financing and stronger government support, the World Bank can now play an important role in establishing a regional catastrophe insurance mechanism in the Pacific islands.The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility The CCRIF: How was it created and what problems was it designed to solve?The primary objective of the CCRIF is to cover the post-disaster liquidity gap—that is, the gap between emergency funding and rehabilitation funding. The need for prompt release of funds was a major goal of the CCRIF, which substantially influenced the decision to use a parametric policy. To date, the facility has paid three claims (one for earthquake and two for hurricanes), all of which have been paid within 15 days.During the workshop session, representatives of the World Bank and the CCRIF described how the creation of the CCRIF had been accomplished in two phases. Its implementation was initially funded by Japan and involved modeling by EQECAT (one of three global modeling companies), examining possible financial structures and governance arrangements, preparing operating manuals, and selling the concept to Caribbean governments. The CCRIF was then incorporated as a captive insurance organization in the Cayman Islands with a catastrophe insurance expert undertaking front office duties and a captive agent providing back office services. The CCRIF appointed Benfield as the broker to intermediate with reinsurance markets. An independent asset manager was also appointed. An initial feasibility study for the CCRIF was conducted in November 2005, in part to gauge the level of country interest in establishing such a facility. The CCRIF management set the goal of having 10 countries committing to the scheme—from among 20 Caribbean Community (CARICOM) members—but recognized the facility could be sustained, if necessary, with only six participants inclusive of Jamaica. Individual discussions 

No. of annual disasters reported

1614121086420195019601970Year198019902000

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri24   24

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM








Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

were held with countries and also via regional 

workshops. A particular effort was made to include government officials with technical responsibility in these workshops. Doing so provided a group of officials that could reliably inform senior government officials on a continuing basis. To establish a firm basis of support, the CCRIF requested a 2-year initial commitment from governments to provide stability within the scheme as it commenced. Premiums ranged from $500,000 to $2 million annually. In the first year, an equivalent participation fee was also charged, which allowed capital to be quickly built. During this critical formative period, CARICOM provided essential expressions of political support. The Cayman Islands experienceThe Cayman Islands shares some critical risk characteristics with Pacific countries and is especially exposed to earthquake and hurricane risk. A turning point for the Cayman Islands occurred in 2004 when hurricane Ivan caused damage estimated at 184% of gross domestic product (GDP). Notwithstanding that the government had a proactive strategy at the time, including property insurance, a mitigation program, a disaster fund, and enforcement of building codes, hurricane Ivan forced the realization that more needed to be done to anticipate and manage catastrophe risk. After hurricane Ivan, 16 regional governments across the Caribbean expressed interest in a catastrophe insurance facility, with each expressing different risk concerns. CCRIF policies were put in place in May 2007. In August 2007, the category 3 hurricane Dean passed near the Cayman Islands but was too far to the south to achieve wind speeds on the main island necessary to trigger the policy. Nonetheless, damage was incurred and government officials wanted a payout and had little interest in discussing the fine points of triggers and models. In the aftermath of hurricane Ivan, and recognizing that efforts are needed to enhance communications and understanding of CCRIF operations, CCRIF management worked closely with the Cayman Islands finance ministry to model various hypothetical scenarios. This led to a better understanding among politicians of the  loss model. Later, a lower return period threshold was implemented for all members to better meet country needs. What does the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility experience tell us about forming a catastrophe risk pool in the Pacific?The workshop panel highlighted some lessons from the CCRIF experience that may be applicable to the work taking place to develop the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Pool Initiative. It is important for countries to understand the risks they are exposed to, to think about the potential consequences of those risks, and the types of resources needed for recovery over what period of time. Communication has been invaluable to CCRIF’s sustainability, particularly in the lead up to implementation of the scheme, and has helped maintain a strong level of commitment among its members. Clearer and more consistent early messages to governments—for example, regarding the CCRIF’s aim, how modeling works, how the policy works, more information on premiums and deductibles—would have been beneficial. During its design and inception, considerable discussion was required to build a consensus for the CCRIF. It is clear now that such dialogue is important so that the final result is something countries own over the long term. Discussion centered on how important it was to get the scheme right versus getting the scheme running. It was felt that most things were right with the CCRIF, but there was also pressure from the region to make the scheme operational. The CCRIF continues to evolve, but is increasingly becoming part of the regional disaster risk management (DRM) architecture. The most important message was to be flexible, as it is not possible to get all aspects of the scheme right the first time. •••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri25   25

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific67

67

A midterm review recently undertaken by 

the World Bank made a number of sound recommendations. While modeling firm EQECAT had adapted its models for use in the Caribbean, the CCRIF is now considering changing to a model based in the Caribbean. This shift to a new model has been discussed with individual participant countries and at workshops. Issues such as premium and coverage arising from the transition between models, and possible differences in model results that may not fit with the current trigger guidelines are being considered. New products such as flood cover (potentially by mid-2009) or new members would also produce changes.  Potential disruptions brought on by a model change will need to be mitigated, but the CCRIF has in-house expertise to assist in the transition process and a strong focus on communication and dialogue with its member countries. During its initial development, the CCRIF utilized public data from a number of sources, but the availability and quality of the data significantly varied by country. In retrospect, more time could have been spent looking for data and proxy data, using local expertise as much as possible. As data remain an issue, setting up a data repository with the CCRIF member countries is being considered. Some comments expressed at the workshop suggested gathering suitable data for the Pacific would be slow as data collection among many of these countries is similarly uneven and the data tend to be scattered across government agencies and external bodies.The CCRIF is a major milestone in catastrophe risk financing, but nonetheless has implications for donor response post-disaster, since a common approach among donors is to reallocate development funds. While the Cayman Islands was not so dependent on aid and was eager to be self-sufficient, elsewhere in the Caribbean, the situation was different. For example, Grenada has traditionally relied heavily on donors. It took a •••major disaster for them to recognize the liquidity gap between emergency and/or humanitarian funding and rehabilitation funding in terms of lost government revenue. It is this revenue that the CCRIF has been designed to replace, though with only three payouts to date, neither the pattern of government use of funds nor their adequacy  is clear.Financial risk transfer should not be seen as the sole disaster risk management solution. Countries should also look to use risk retention (for example, a disaster fund) and risk reduction tools (such as adequate building codes). Pacific Catastrophe Risk Financing InitiativesPacific island states are especially vulnerable to natural catastrophe risks because of their size, fragile economies, and proximity to geophysical hazards. Annual damage from natural catastrophes averages between 2% and 7% of GDP, and historically this situation has been exacerbated by limited access to world insurance markets to assist in managing this risk. In 2007, the World Bank began work on the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Pool Initiative. The principal objective of this initiative was to develop market-based risk transfer solutions and create a regional catastrophe risk pool to finance governments’ short-term liquidity needs caused by a national disaster. The World Bank viewed its principal role as supporting catastrophe risk assessment efforts in these countries and structuring these risks into a more diversified portfolio to better enable the transfer of these risks to private reinsurance markets. The World Bank Pacific Initiative builds upon long-established relationships with governments, as was the case in the Caribbean. Global risk modeling company Applied Insurance Research (AIR) has produced country-specific risk models. The phase 1 feasibility study of the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Financing Initiative focused on •

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri26   26

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




67

67Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

eight countries: Cook Islands, Fiji Islands, Papua New 

Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. The study considered the costs posed by direct losses to residential, commercial, industrial, and public assets; and emergency losses sustained by government due to cyclones (including wind, rain, and storm surge) and earthquakes (and resultant tsunami generated by  earthquakes greater than the magnitude of 8.5). Hazard intensity, exposure, vulnerability, and losses were considered. Asset replacement costs were calculated for each of the eight countries included. These country specific models permit the design and pricing of individual country insurance coverage, thereby avoiding cross-subsidization effects. The World Bank indicated that the quality of the data available for these eight countries was quite variable. Several data sources were available for cyclones, but earthquake monitoring is less widespread. Using data, proxies, and experience from existing models in other countries, country risk profiles for earthquake and cyclones were prepared. AIR developed catastrophe risk analyses for all eight countries, the first ever performed for these countries. Country risk profiles are used as a technical basis for devising optimal risk mitigation strategies. These profiles show a significant likelihood of future substantial losses due to cyclones and earthquakes. Risk profiles for additional countries are likely to be developed in the second phase of this study. The overall objectives of phase I are to provide, for the first time, catastrophe loss estimates for major hazards for each selected country, and identify catastrophe risk financing options. One such option is a facility that can provide immediate post-disaster liquidity in the event of major perils. Parametric insurance allows for rapid payment, while a regional scheme allows the benefits of diversification. The backing of international reinsurance and capital markets provide stability, while donor contributions help assure sustainability. At present, there are three options for a Pacific initiative being considered. These are

(i) a pooling of risks, supported by reinsurance 

markets (which can result in volatile premiums);

(ii) a combination of risk being retained by the 

countries (backed by a reserve fund) and use of reinsurance; or

(iii) complete reliance on a donor-funded reserve 

pool.For the Pacific, the World Bank estimates the likely size of the required reserve to be about $30 million for each hazard in each country based upon a hypothetical portfolio of typhoon and earthquake risks in eight countries for events exceeding losses with a 10-year return period. In the case of the CCRIF, initial capital came from countries and donors. For the Pacific Catastrophe Pool, initial capitalization of $30 million–$40 million would likely be sufficient to launch the initiative. The next steps (phase II), as endorsed at the World Bank–International Monetary Fund Annual Meeting in October 2008, are to complete the Pacific catastrophe risk assessment through refining existing models and including other countries, and to provide support for implementation of appropriate regional catastrophe financing options. The World Bank believes that opportunity for risk diversification in the Pacific is significant, and that capital requirements needed to sustain major losses can be reduced possibly by as much as 50% if countries decide to act collectively and pool their individual risks rather than insure them individually. The Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission Perspective on managing catastrophe risk in the PacificIn a paper prepared for the conference, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) noted that consideration of a catastrophe insurance scheme by Pacific countries goes back at least as far as the Forum Economic Ministers Meeting in 1999. SOPAC observed that an earlier pilot study had shown that for any insurance scheme to be effective, it first needed to be placed within a broader risk management plan.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri27   27

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



Any catastrophe insurance scheme must take 

into account DRM, climate change programs, and sustainability issues. SOPAC has historically promoted elements of a disaster management framework and recognized that partnerships need to be strengthened—national partnerships between different areas of government, as well as regional and international partnerships. SOPAC stressed the importance of establishing systematic data collection and management systems and building databases at the national level. The appropriate legislative, institutional, and operational framework to support catastrophe risk insurance must also be identified.Finally, SOPAC highlighted the notion of country ownership, particularly through understanding of options, benefits, and costs. Foremost among the needs of Pacific countries to venture into catastrophe risk insurance are  quality damage databases and economic impact modeling. Also important to the long-term success of the initiative will be high-level lobbying and sensitization, guaranteeing pool funds, diversifying products to support existing approaches, and establishing a regulatory and management framework.Options for Catastrophe Risk Transfer  in the Pacific RegionThe main focus of this session was the exploration of appropriate roles that the insurance industry can play in partnerships with ADB and the World Bank in bringing a Pacific catastrophe risk–transfer facility to fruition. In this regard, the panel emphasized the importance of early involvement by the private sector insurers, risk managers, and intermediaries to assure the longevity and sustainability of the facility. It was noted that the prospect of long-term success of any such program is vital to private sector participation to allow sufficient time to recover significant upfront costs. In addition, it was noted that early involvement of the private sector is an effective means to integrate risk mitigation programs in the broader scheme since it had particular expertise in this area. For its part, the World Bank observed that while it is leading this overall effort in partnership with ADB, it  viewed its role as a facilitator, not a driver of the process, and its objective was to draw in private sector participation as much as possible.The panel recognized that obtaining quality data was  a crucial issue for the Pacific. While governments  have data located in various places, these need to be  centrally managed and accessible. In October 2008,  ADB approved a $1 million technical assistance  (TA 6496-REG: Regional Partnerships for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Preparedness) that will strengthen partnerships. The project will support the development of up to eight geographical information system (GIS)–based national databases, and a consolidated regional database encompassing risk, hazard, and geo-referenced exposure data that would enable projection of country vulnerability and calculate losses when disasters happen. The dataset will support informed decisionmaking aimed at minimizing the negative social and environmental impacts of catastrophic events, hazard risk management, and vulnerability assessment. The outputs of the project will also support the broader work led by the World Bank on catastrophe insurance for the Pacific. The project will be implemented for 2 years and will focus on those eight countries covered by the World Bank’s phase 1 feasibility study—Cook Islands, Fiji Islands, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. ADB’s technical assistance in strengthening in-country use of the data will be helpful. It was noted that while the AIR focus so far has been largely on building losses, not infrastructure losses or healthcare costs, efforts are underway to expand the base data available and discussions have been held with ADB on this issue. Participants recognized that the 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri28   28

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

modeling process is challenging and that the AIR work 

presented was a first attempt, not a final assessment. The questions and issues raised would contribute to  fine-tuning of the models. Participants pointed out that AIR modeled emergency losses (presumed to be the rough equivalent of the liquidity gap faced by governments), as a function of direct losses, utilized the experience of a number of countries in the Caribbean, Central, and South America. The Caribbean is very different from the Pacific and the implications need to be explored further—for example, the reliance on subsistence livelihoods in the Pacific and what this might mean for an understanding of the economic damage created by disasters. This issue needs to be reflected in estimating emergency costs, as governments need funds to ensure food security. An improved understanding of emergency losses could be discussed with Pacific governments. Education of politicians was seen as an important issue. Can politicians, who tend to have short-term horizons and come and go from office with some frequency, be educated on the value of catastrophe insurance? Could the civil service play an important role in educating politicians? In the Cayman Islands, quarterly updates on the CCRIF are provided to cabinet officials and education is ongoing. Different ministries have different interests, but once a dollar value had been placed on contingent liability through risk modeling, clear solutions can be discussed. The benefits of a catastrophe insurance scheme to the people, the voters, can be highlighted to politicians. Consultation with politicians was seen as important, as was country ownership of any scheme.In particular, Pacific island–government representatives stressed the need to view this risk transfer initiative as only one part of a more comprehensive catastrophe risk strategy in the region. As part of that broader strategy, disaster management solutions for affected agricultural production and livelihoods must also be found. The catastrophe insurance scheme devised for the Pacific needs to be a market-based solution to ensure its sustainability. The active involvement of national and international insurance companies is instrumental to the marketing, ultimate acceptance, and success of a scheme. Insurance companies’ capital could be leveraged to support development of the insurance industry in the Pacific and industry data and business contacts could be vital building blocks in developing the local market. Ideas for addressing gaps in knowledge, research, and experience for catastrophe risk transfer  in the PacificCommunication is paramount as elected officials and governments need clear consistent explanations to building long-term relationships and strengthen national, regional, and international partnerships. The benefits of a catastrophe insurance scheme to the people—the voters—should be highlighted to politicians as part of a campaign to encourage regional “ownership” of any catastrophe risk insurance scheme.The CCRIF has in-house experts to provide technical advice daily. This support will be even more important as perils are added, additional countries incorporated into the scheme, and/or as the catastrophe risk insurance models and parametric triggers change. Any catastrophe insurance scheme needs to be flexible and should evolve with time, as experience is gained and views or priorities change. Coverage of perils and the parametric triggers used should be considerably thought out. For example, a single wind-related parametric trigger for tropical cyclone and/or hurricane may not be entirely suitable as it may be appropriate to consider storm surge and excess rainfall or flood in determining payouts that realistically reflect losses.Strengthening the understanding of emergency losses and liquidity gaps is needed. In the ••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri29   29

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific0Caribbean, no data are available on the percent of the liquidity gap filled by CCRIF payments. No comprehensive emergency loss data have been found in the Pacific. Modeling has been based on building losses without considering infrastructure losses or healthcare costs. In the Pacific, subsistence livelihoods and food security may need to be included in an understanding of the economic damage created by natural disasters.Data is an important issue. More time could have been spent looking for data and proxy data in the Caribbean. Local expertise is invaluable. Keeping data up-to-date requires national and regional input, as this is where much of the data originate. Emphasizing national use of the dataset helps build support for longer-term storage, maintenance, and ownership of the data.The interaction of any catastrophe insurance scheme with DRM and risk reduction initiatives, climate change programs, and sustainability issues emerged as a consistent regional ••requirement. Similarly, the importance of combining risk management instruments to both protect the fiscal balance of the state and to improve its capacity to respond in the case of a natural disaster was emphasized. Catastrophe insurance is just one instrument for countries to consider and it is important to understand if it is right for the Pacific.As building standards and building codes appropriate for catastrophic events are absent or not enforced in some Pacific nations, ADB could work usefully with developing member countries and the Institute of Professional Engineers New Zealand or a similar body to establish suitable regulations and training.If the issue of catastrophe insurance in the Pacific is to move forward, insurance industry representatives should be included in the dialogue so that the industry can understand the scheme, work to ensure its continuity, and collaborate with ADB in endeavors to increase insurance penetration in Pacific nations.••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri30   30

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




0

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri31   31

7/7/2009   4:02:08 PM




6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri32   32

7/7/2009   4:02:11 PM




Objectives

At the outset of the conference, the objectives of the megacity workshop were identified as follows:Identify unique risk characteristics and special challenges in organizing risk transfer mechanisms for Asian megacities. Set objectives for an Asian megacity risk transfer program. Chart specific courses of action that will help enable an Asian megacity risk transfer program to succeed. Background: Megacity Growth Introduces  Disaster Risks that Merit Special AttentionGiven the state of catastrophe risk management in developing Asian countries, it would be difficult to find any area that would not benefit from in-depth analysis and development of disaster recovery and risk transfer programs. The challenge lies in deciding where to focus attention and resources first. One approach is to identify a small number of areas and risks where solutions will have the most immediate and far-reaching impact.•••Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms  in Asia and the PacificCatastrophe Insurance for Megacities

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri33   33

7/7/2009   4:02:12 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific







Figure 4: Munich Re’s Megacity Risk Index

Source: Spranger, M. 2008. The Special Nature of Disaster Risk in Megacities. Paper presented at the Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region Conference and Workshops, Tokyo, 4–5 November. www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp“Munich Re has developed a natural hazard risk index for megacities . . . It enables the risk potential to be identified quickly and makes risks comparable and transparent. Assessments of vulnerability can be confirmed and objectified through specific surveys.”

In recent years, Asian megacities have grown more 

populous and economically significant. With this growth, risk has become more concentrated in terms of both economics and human life, and most Asian megacities have significant catastrophe exposures that remain largely uninsured. While rural and smaller city populations are no less vulnerable to natural catastrophes, the workshop was organized around Asian megacities with the intent that solutions for megacities may improve disaster preparedness and sustainability of development in other areas as well.Risk pooling in various forms has been discussed widely as an approach to managing Asian catastrophe risk. If  a catastrophe risk pool or other regional insurance mechanism is pursued, it is natural to consider risks in megacities that would be suitable for pooling. One of the key advantages of a risk pool is the information exchange and learning that takes place among pool participants. It will be important to establish means and strategies to encourage information exchange and learning with or without a risk pool (see Box 7).

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri34   34

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

Figure 5: Megacity Contribution to National GDP in Asia in 2005 and Projected for 2020GDP = gross domestic product.Source: Mechler, R., S. Hochrainer, and K. Williges. 2008. The Special Nature of Natural Disaster Risk in Asian Megacities and the Case for Megacity Risk Pooling. Paper presented at the Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for the Asia and Pacific Region Conference and Workshops, Tokyo, 4–5 November. www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp“Economic activity and value added of megacities can be of the scale comparable to many national economies. Manila, Dhaka, Karachi,  and Jakarta are the key economic powerhouses of their respective countries. India and [the People’s Republic of] China are more diversified, yet the five major Indian cities—Bangalore, Mumbai, Chennai, Calcutta, and New Delhi—contribute a total of 15% to India’s GDP and similar figures can be gathered for [the People’s Republic of] China. Large disruptions in such cities may therefore also cause economy-wide disruptions. What is more, megacities in Asia are often considered to serve a gateway function to the global economy and also as those cities exhibit a high percentage of skilled labor, natural disasters may result in the economic disruption of entire regions.”

051015202530DelhiMumbaiCalcuttaDhakaKarachiJakartaManilaShanghaiBeijingChengduCityPercentage of GDP (%)

2020

2005

Asian megacity risk was relatively unexplored territory before the workshop, so this workshop necessarily followed a more exploratory direction than the simultaneous workshop on risk pooling for the Pacific, where the World Bank and others have been developing a program for some time. While some Asian megacity risk management programs may be in advanced stages of development, it is more commonly the case that an Asian megacity is not prepared to shop for risk transfer solutions without first analyzing risks and creating a comprehensive risk management and disaster response strategy.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri35   35

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific67

67

Box 7: Report Highlight: Risk Pooling

In a broad sense, a risk pool is any mechanism for sharing risk among two or more parties. Insurance, reinsurance, and pools mandated by government are all examples of risk pools. The main economic benefit of pooling is an improved ability to plan and budget for sudden and unexpected losses. The main risk management benefits of risk pooling are risk diversification and scale. In some cases, a pool may provide the valuable collateral benefits of focusing attention on catastrophe risk management and facilitating communication and knowledge sharing among pool participants. The primary drawbacks of pooling are related to the assumption of other parties’ risk, which may be subject to moral hazard, asymmetric information, or differences of opinion regarding the proportion of cost borne by each pool participant.As used in this document, a “standalone risk pool” is a special risk pool established to satisfy a particular risk transfer need that is not addressed adequately in existing risk transfer markets. This definition excludes pass-through entities and other mechanisms established to repackage risk for existing third party risk takers. Thus, a standalone risk pool is generally self-funded and retains most or all risk within the pool.A stand-alone risk pool may be viable under certain conditions:

• Pooled risks are similar in terms of economics and hazard assessment (for example, it would be ineffective to pool a 

$10 million potential wind loss with a $50 billion potential earthquake loss).

• Any information asymmetries can be adequately resolved.

• An enforceable pooling agreement can be negotiated among pool participants.

• Pool participants have sufficient financial strength to sustain the pool over time, or appropriate credit enhancement is provided 

by a financially strong third party.

• The number of pool participants is sufficiently high to keep loss costs relatively steady and predictable.

Pool participants see benefits that outweigh costs (in the long run, this means they should receive payments after most significant catastrophic events).Because of the difficulty of satisfying the conditions outlined above, pure stand-alone catastrophe risk pools are rare in practice. However, the concept of a stand-alone risk pool has been used successfully as a starting point for building catastrophe risk transfer programs in regions such as the Caribbean and in countries such as Indonesia. Pooling structures like Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility and MAIPARK may operate on a stand-alone basis up to a point, but may also secure capacity for the most costly events through reinsurance, securitization, and other risk transfer mechanisms.A pool may begin as a stand-alone pool with the intent to transfer risk to third parties when the pool’s track record provides sufficient data to transfer risk to third-party risk takers. Conversely, stand-alone catastrophe risk pools are sometimes proposed when a catastrophe in one area reduces the capital and capacity of global reinsurance companies, resulting in increased reinsurance prices everywhere. While a stand-alone pool can charge lower premiums in the short term, critics question whether such pools can survive significant catastrophes in the long run when premiums are set below market rates by design.In the workshop on Asian megacities, all panelists supported the application of risk pooling principles to manage megacity risk. However, it became clear early in the first session that the bulk of catastrophe risk faced by Asian megacities would not satisfy many of the conditions that would make a stand-alone risk pool viable. Although there may be special cases in which a new risk pool might be established for a particular risk, the panel discussions emphasized the need to study the special requirements of each megacity individually before pursuing a particular program such as a regional risk pool.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri36   36

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM




67

67Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

Overview: Tailoring Solutions for Each 

Megacity’s Situation and PrioritiesTwo workshop sessions were held to illuminate the characteristics of natural catastrophe risk faced by Asian  megacities and to explore possible approaches to managing these risks. The first session began with two  papers on the special nature of catastrophe risk in megacities, followed by a panel discussion of key considerations in approaching these risks. The second session began with a paper that outlined the present catastrophe insurance program in Manila and proposed a new program to provide coverage for government subsidized housing. The Philippines case served as a  launch pad for a panel discussion of the options available to address the highest priority needs identified in consultation with key megacity and country officials. As mentioned above, risk transfer solutions for Asian megacities can have immediate and far-reaching impact. However, panelists noted that the differences among Asian megacities are significant and multidimensional to  such an extent that a new, stand-alone risk pool single-handedly might not be able to provide risk transfer solutions that would address the most important needs of all megacities. Instead, it might be better to characterize the unique circumstances and priorities of each megacity and develop individualized programs for both hazard management and risk transfer. Building on the range of risk transfer products available, solutions can then be tailored to provide coverage that is feasible with current data quality and market preferences, as well as laying a foundation for future improvement and growth.The following types of coverage were identified as high priorities for megacities:HouseholdsInfrastructureRelief and responseThese coverage types were considered in the context of the goal of eliminating poverty.•••Amid a multitude of needs, some priorities stand outNatural catastrophes can cause both human and economic loss in megacities. No single risk management program can eliminate all risk, but a handful of coverage types are considered most urgently needed in megacities.Coverage for households is key to sustainable developmentA natural catastrophe, like other causes of loss, can erase many years of economic progress for a family and  eliminate savings originally intended to secure future prosperity, such as funds for education. In effect, without catastrophe insurance or other aid, a family that has  risen out of poverty can be thrust back into poverty with no clear path to recovery. Catastrophe coverage for  households therefore has significant implications for sustainable development and elimination of poverty.Indemnity insurance is the principal form of risk transfer for households, as parametric and index-linked products by themselves are not generally practical for individuals and families. Natural disaster protection for households is a lower priority than basic life and property insurance and it is most efficient to include catastrophe coverage with other forms of insurance rather than through stand-alone catastrophe insurance. Thus, the first challenge is to improve penetration of life and property insurance in Asian megacities. The second challenge is to strengthen the management of catastrophe risk by domestic insurers with significant risk concentrations in megacities.Various types of insurance for households are already available in most, if not all, megacities and developing member countries in general. Country-level risk pools such as MAIPARK in Indonesia provide coverage for natural catastrophes, but their usefulness for megacity risk is limited by the dearth of uncorrelated risks of similar size and likelihood within the same pool. Capacity for megacity risk in such programs is typically obtained through reinsurance or the capital markets. However, when data scarcity and lack of models repel risk takers, 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri37   37

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



governments may be forced to absorb the risk through 

public funds or allow the pool to fail.In developing countries, many households are unable to pay for any insurance without drawing from scarce funds needed for basic necessities such as food and shelter. Attempts to sell insurance to these households will most often fail for obvious reasons. It may be worthwhile in some cases to develop microinsurance programs more fitted to the needs of households.The special case of subsidized public housing in Manila was presented as a possible pilot program to develop an  indemnity-based catastrophe insurance program for households. The idea is for household catastrophe coverage to be integrated with the existing housing program. As the government funds the program, administrative costs may be contained while the program would provide learning applicable to both private and public insurance for households in the region. Details on the Manila case are included in the papers available on the ADB website.In addition, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) government’s response to the Szechuan earthquake was discussed as a possible model for providing for the basic needs of people who have lost their homes to a natural catastrophe. After the 2008 Szechuan earthquake, the PRC government offered housing to people whose homes had been destroyed. Providing shelter to those who had lost the most was seen as a positive step in recovery. It  was noted that the provision of housing for victims of natural disaster might be formalized ex ante, through cooperation among private insurers, governments, and  international organizations, rather than reallocating resources after a disaster. Better catastrophe protection for infrastructure has widespread benefitsDamage to critical infrastructure can have far-reaching consequences, particularly in megacities, the survival and prosperity of which rely heavily on the uninterrupted supply of power, fuel, telecommunications, water, food,  transportation systems, health care, and law enforcement. Infrastructure in Asian megacities is rarely insured. Where international financial institutions are involved directly in development of infrastructure, they can play a direct role in improving catastrophe risk management by implementing policies to encourage disciplined management of catastrophe risk along with other threats to infrastructure.Because of the many facilities involved in providing critical infrastructure, no single risk transfer solution is  available to cover all infrastructure exposures. Furthermore, each megacity’s infrastructure has unique characteristics that require tailored solutions, so a one-size-fits-all approach is not feasible except in the context of providing building blocks for a more comprehensive solution. It is usually important to pursue risk reduction and mitigation programs and to solidify recovery plans first, and only then to explore financial or economic risk transfer. Often, risk mitigation is cheaper and lasts longer than insurance. Sometimes, insurance is not available unless effective mitigation and recovery programs are in place.One suggestion voiced by the panel was to develop an index of city landmarks, key government buildings, and other well-known properties to manage infrastructure risk as well as other government and city-wide exposures, Under such a “landmark index” scheme, payments might  be tied by formula to measurable damage at each  pre-specified location to offset infrastructure-related losses above and beyond the direct physical damage to these structures. This approach would combine aspects of parametric risk transfer with traditional indemnity insurance with the aim to provide both speedy recovery and minimal basis risk.It was suggested that India’s large cities be considered for pilot programs for infrastructure risk management. While India is not alone in its need for critical infrastructure protection, it may have enough cities of  sufficient size to develop a catastrophe risk pool or 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri38   38

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

similar mechanism without the added complexity of a 

multi-country facility.Development organizations can promote prudent management of infrastructure risk by requiring disciplined catastrophe risk–management programs to accompany any infrastructure project funded by ADB.Programs to enhance relief and response are  critical to minimizing the impact of disastersTiming is essential to effective disaster risk management (DRM). In the case of human loss, the speed of response may be a matter of life or death. Economic loss may also be reduced dramatically by expediting relief and response. For governments, hospitals, aid agencies, and others involved in early relief and response, parametric risk–transfer products can add a definitive amount of funding that can be used for disaster relief without reallocating public money. Parametric risk–transfer products carry basis risk and funds are transferred only after the event parameters are final, in some cases a month or more after the event. Still, parametric risk transfer is suited for response and recovery, being the most transparent, the quickest to settle, and the most cost-effective of all catastrophe risk–transfer forms currently available.As with critical infrastructure, financial risk–transfer mechanisms are most useful when an effective relief and response plan is in place with all necessary components on hand. Where relief and response plans are nonexistent or inadequate, these plans should be developed before or in conjunction with setting up financial risk–transfer mechanisms. For example, if evacuation plans require more buses than are currently on hand, it may be best to acquire more buses before developing a parametric risk–transfer program.Poverty elimination and catastrophe risk management are inseparably connectedADB’s interest in catastrophe risk management is driven by its overarching goals of eliminating poverty and catalyzing sustainable development. More proactive risk reduction and transfer by low-income households will help ensure that development is sustainable. Better management of critical infrastructure risk and disaster relief and response will help the poor as well as those who might otherwise fall into poverty in consequence of  a catastrophe. However, while improved catastrophe risk management generally benefits the poor whether or  not they are the direct beneficiaries of a risk transfer program, it is important to keep the poverty reduction agenda in mind while considering projects.Chief risk officers: To keep adequate focus on catastrophe risk, name a point personIt was suggested that each megacity, member country, and development organization assign an official to manage all kinds of risk. The chief risk officer would identify exposures to a wide variety of possible risks and  coordinate with multiple divisions to prioritize these exposures and to explore coverage options. It might be  valuable to host information exchanges, training, and educational programs, and gatherings of chief risk officers and their representatives to define their roles and responsibilities more clearly, since it is quite probable that some people will begin this position without specialized training or knowledge of risk management. The role of  “risk officer” at an aid or development organization may  be split into two functions. First, a risk officer can monitor and analyze the organization’s risks. Second, a  risk officer can develop programs to assist country and city risk officers in fulfilling their duties. Given the broad set of skills and knowledge needed to perform either of these two functions, risk officers need access to internal resources and external specialists to develop an understanding of enterprise-wide risk.Risk mitigation and reduction enhance the value of financial risk transfer programsIt has been suggested earlier that risk mitigation and  reduction measures generally take priority over economic  or financial risk transfer. Several more specific 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri39   39

7/7/2009   4:02:13 PM




Applications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the PacificNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific4041

4041

suggestions were made to encourage better risk 

mitigation and reduction practices. First, seismic and other building codes may need to be strengthened and  newly constructed facilities should be engineered to withstand severe catastrophes. Second, insurance companies in developed countries often play a role in  enforcing prudent construction and risk mitigation standards by imposing strict engineering and construction requirements on those insured and, in some cases, by offering lower premiums to individuals and businesses that abide by certain risk reducing rules.Priorities can be addressed within a larger development agendaIn some cases, programs for catastrophe risk management and reduction may be incorporated into broader development plans. In particular, in areas where  financial market development is a high priority, catastrophe-linked financial products may be included in the overall financial market-development priorities.Roles for multilateral development finance institutionsHelp promote management of natural catastrophe risk in projects by raising awareness of the issues and by including explicit requirements for catastrophe coverage in new projects.Mobilize international expertise as demonstrated by the conference.Act as an impartial advisor to governments seeking to improve catastrophe risk–management practices.Organize open-source model development to supplement commercial models.Encourage public–private partnership to facilitate transactions.Finally, in some cases, multilateral development institutions might act as a guarantor or provide a contingent capital facility linked to natural catastrophes. In this way, they might improve the ability of member countries to tap into global ••••••risk-taking capacity and transfer risk on favorable terms.Key ideas raised in the megacity workshopStandardsRequire DRM plans and compliance with internationally accepted building codes and other standards before a project may receive funding or other assistance.Promote compliance with standards through training and education and by supporting organizations that develop standards.Development institutions’ portfolios Collect catastrophe risk data for each project that receives funding or other assistance from international organizations.Analyze ex post response to recent natural catastrophes and formalize policies and procedures for future disasters to better understand and model own portfolio risk.Securitize a portion of own-portfolio megacity catastrophe risk to encourage growth in the market for these risks.ResearchProvide funding to develop state-of-the-art catastrophe models for megacities.Support development of publicly available resources to analyze and plan for catastrophes.Facilitate education, exchange of information, and learning that can be transferred from one project to another among megacities and among countries in the region.Pilot programsInvite developing countries and megacities to submit proposals for programs to satisfy their high-priority catastrophe risk–transfer needs.Work with government counterparts (i.e., the chief risk officer or another point person or megacity to develop a comprehensive DRM ••••••••••

7th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri40   40

7/8/2009   12:01:13 PM




4041

4041Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificApplications of Catastrophe Risk Transfer Mechanisms in Asia and the Pacific

program that includes mitigation, relief, response, 

recovery plans, and funding mechanisms to support these plans.Assist in efforts to secure catastrophe coverage for subsidized housing in megacities such as Metro Manila.Develop programs to provide contingent funding for shelter that would be given to people left homeless after catastrophe. Support programs for infrastructure risk management, for example, risk transfer linked to damage at key public facilities and landmark buildings in a megacity.Establish a regional pool or other facility to be used for catastrophe risk–transfer programs and use the first pilot program as the inaugural transaction of the new facility.••••Suggestions for regional countries and megacitiesAssign a chief risk officer to coordinate all types of risk management.Develop detailed disaster response and recovery procedures.Identify the highest-priority vulnerabilities of government, private enterprise, households, and infrastructure.Study ways to reduce or transfer high-priority risks.As needed, seek assistance in developing and implementing risk reduction and risk transfer programs and submit proposals to organizations that may provide assistance.•••••

7th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri41   41

7/8/2009   12:01:13 PM




6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri42   42

7/7/2009   4:02:16 PM




Areas for Consideration

Framework StatementThe key finding of this report is that many opportunities exist for transferring natural disaster risk in Asia and the Pacific if addressed within a regional public–private partnership (PPP). That partnership must necessarily include national governments, ADB, and other regional donors and institutions, and key private sector players, both global and local. The opportunities discussed in this report will largely remain opportunities unless obstacles and gaps in knowledge, research, and experience are bridged. A regional approach to bridging these gaps, involving all critical parties, represents the best chance to unlock the resources necessary to move the region forward to better disaster risk management (DRM). ADB has an opportunity to exercise leadership, or at least assume a facilitator role, in the field of catastrophe risk finance. By sponsoring the Tokyo Conference on financing catastrophe risks, it has made a statement regarding the importance of DRM in achieving sustainable development in its member countries, and it has led by convening wide-ranging interests in catastrophe risk finance to assess opportunities for PPP.Because ADB finds itself at the center of such an array of interests, countries, and institutions, and because catastrophe risk finance has emerged as such a potent instrument of DRM and sustainable development, it is vital for ADB to consider its actions going forward in the context of a larger framework for action. That framework, as articulated by many at the Tokyo Conference, should serve as both a platform upon which the individual action plans described below can be launched, but also an overarching purpose under which all initiatives can share a common objective. The platform in this case could be a detailed statement of commitment to press forward with coordinated efforts to leverage its resources to bridge gaps in knowledge, research, and experience in catastrophe risk finance in Asia and the Pacific. Under such a statement of commitment, ADB could generate significant private sector activity to invigorate greater investment and natural hazards risk management in the region. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri43   43

7/7/2009   4:02:17 PM




Areas for Consideration Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific







At a more advanced level, this framework could take the 

form of a PPP entity, perhaps organized as an advisory committee to ADB management that would meet to discuss  the progress and results of individual initiatives and make recommendations on a continuing basis. This advisory committee would be made up of ADB’s regional partners, including national governments and private sector  interests. Such a PPP could serve as a focal point to  attract incremental capacity and risk management to the region and encourage private sector involvement. The objective of such a PPP would be to create a liquid and vibrant marketplace for catastrophe risk in Asia and the Pacific, using ADB’s convening power and resources where appropriate. Ultimately ADB would terminate its involvement when the market matures and the private sector is fully engaged. We estimate that ADB’s involvement in this effort 

will be necessary for at least 5 years. 

All the recommendations below fit within such a framework. In one way or another, they seek to bridge a knowledge or experience gap that has been identified as an impediment to building a full array of catastrophe risk opportunities for developing member countries (DMCs).The conference discussions identified many initiatives that could promote catastrophe risk financing in Asia and the Pacific. The following seven recommendations were the most prominent among many sound proposals. The first four appear in order of priority, based on the opinions expressed. Recommendations

1. Establish a regional PPP for catastrophe risk 

finance. The partnership should link national governments and ADB programs and resources  to commercial interests in the region.This tripartite partnership should first, in a preliminary study, assess the resources, needs, and requirements of all its constituent elements, most critically the requirements of member countries.•Any effective PPP in this area will depend on the  private sector having a broad and detailed understanding of ADB programs and resources. Currently, this is not the case. Understanding among ADB’s natural constituency of what tools  and powers it has to deploy in this area seems limited. For the private sector to assess the potential value of a PPP, it must first have an  accurate and detailed understanding of what those resources are. ADB must actively participate in creating such a document so that it provides a clear representation of its resources, but also addresses issues and requirements of its private sector partners. As ADB considers how best to leverage its resources in the area of catastrophe risk finance,  it must understand the capability and interests  of the commercial market as it views opportunities in the region. This is essential, since in developing a PPP framework, ADB must be able to identify the proper entry and exit points for its own resources. Since it should focus on playing a catalytic role to draw in private sector–risk capital, it must first understand what the commercial market perceives as impediments to market entry. An assessment of commercial market interests and capabilities should include global insurers, reinsurers, intermediaries, rating agencies, and capital market interests. It is also important that  the assessment cover local and regional insurance and reinsurance companies that have the potential to provide access to local risk capital and expertise.

2. Conduct an internal assessment of ADB programs 

and resources to identify actions that it could take to advance catastrophe risk financing in the region. Following are examples of where ADB could exert a more powerful role.ADB could demonstrate its commitment to DRM “best practices” by more aggressively managing its own catastrophe risk exposure. It could start ••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri44   44

7/7/2009   4:02:17 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAreas for Consideration

by consistently and uniformly assessing its 

catastrophe risk exposure for each project loan or guarantee. In this way it could use its own book of business as a catalyst for drawing in private sector capacity to the region. Doing so would help address the harmful follow-on effects of disasters on its own lending resources following a catastrophic event. Insuring such risk into the private market sector would also help eliminate the opportunity costs to its own mission resulting from natural catastrophes.It could also explore ways to spread protection benefits to DMCs by directly providing subsidized catastrophe risk protection to project loans at a  small surcharge. It could also sponsor a catastrophe (CAT) bond issue that could provide indirect benefits to DMCs by, for example, providing a debt service holiday (back stopped by CAT bond protection) in the event of a natural disaster. ADB could also consider using its guarantee authority to backstop CAT bonds issued within Asia. Development of CAT bonds in Asia as an asset class worthy of local investor interest is an important goal and would be aided by the use of its guarantee authority in this manner. 

3. Establish funding for catastrophe model 

development in Asia and the Pacific as part  of a Regional Catastrophe Risk Financing PPP.Perhaps the most consistent message received during the conference was that the dearth of catastrophe risk models in DMCs was impeding both the development of catastrophe risk–financing opportunities and the entry of key market participants. Development of high-quality catastrophe models in the region may be a critical missing link needed to draw in private sector risk financing. Development costs can be considerable and rigorous, ongoing maintenance is essential.As part of a PPP framework, ADB should initiate funding of a catastrophe-model pilot project in a  •••••select area or group of countries that can demonstrate the incentive value of such models by drawing in private sector participation. Once established, such models can be licensed or spun off to private sector entities. A regional data bank on catastrophe hazards and vulnerability that would be open for all to access should be established. The introduction of catastrophe insurance in the Pacific, and insurance modeling generally, would be well served by improved data in five areas: hazard data, consequence data, economic and financial loss data including data on emergency losses, exposure data, digital terrain models, and bathymetric data.

4. Sponsor a small workshop focused on 

development of a megacity catastrophe risk financing pilot program in one or two Asian  DMC cities. The four objectives of this targeted workshop are to

(i) determine the benefits these megacities need 

to derive from a catastrophe risk scheme and how such a scheme would fit into existing DRM plans and institutions;

(ii) analyze specific natural catastrophe risk 

factors and parameters in one or two DMC megacities;

(iii) discuss the relative merits of different risk 

financing alternatives, e.g., whether pooling and/or parametric insurance could be used to greatest advantage; and

(iv) agree to launch a pilot project in one or more 

cities to establish feasibility, demonstrate the application of PPP, and attract global risk capital.A megacity workshop aimed at developing catastrophe risk–financing opportunities would dovetail with ADB’s urban sector strategy and  be consistent with its urban development objectives, including achieving sustainable urban development.•••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri45   45

7/7/2009   4:02:17 PM




Areas for Consideration Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific67

67

Key technical issues to be discussed at the 

workshop would include

(i) Establishing specific data requirements 

in terms of hazards, exposures and vulnerability of populations, and infrastructure;

(ii) Determining what risk modeling is essential 

to structure a program; and

(iii) Analyzing costs, funding, and affordability 

issues.If the feasibility of such a megacity pilot project can be determined, the great value of this effort will be the establishment of a real, functioning program that can power other CAT risk financing endeavors that are based on the PPP model and that can pave the way for private risk capital. 

5. Organize an educational curriculum and 

supporting programs to train DMC chief risk officers and others with related responsibilities.Training could be conducted primarily through web tutorials with matching printed materials, which might be translated into various languages as necessary.Upon completing a basic core curriculum, participants might become eligible to join an organization of risk officers, which could host events and training workshops, and publish periodicals or journals for its members. Completion of training might also be linked to funding for conferences, workshops, and further training programs.To leverage existing resources, a group of experts  could be convened, under ADB’s oversight,  to work out the details of curriculum, certificates, publications, organizations, and ongoing management. Brokers, reinsurers, insurers, risk modelers, and existing regulatory and professional organizations already have abundant •••••educational resources, many of which are publicly available and only need to be adapted to the audience. The curriculum should maintain a clear, consistent vocabulary throughout and concentrate on areas where DMCs would derive the greatest benefit. Eventually, the curriculum could be expanded to include insurance, risk management, mitigation, and disaster response. ADB should consider how the training module could be integrated with other activities in risk management, such as a potential megacity pilot workshop, risk modeling support, and implementation of a general catastrophe risk management framework. 

6. Launch a small microinsurance catastrophe risk 

insurance-pilot project in several DMCs to study issues of insurance acceptance, awareness, and relevance to the needs and concerns of ordinary people.One explanation for the very low penetration of  insurance (as a percent of gross domestic product) in DMCs is the absence of a relevant connection to the daily concerns of average people. A pilot study such as this could reveal what natural catastrophes mean to people, as opposed to what they mean to governments.The importance of socioeconomic factors in the  acceptance of insurance has perhaps been underestimated. A microinsurance project could  illuminate cultural and socioeconomic factors  of insurance acceptance by building an  insurance program from the ground up. As such, people’s interests and concerns would tend to take precedence. For example, protecting human life and livelihoods, including livestock and farm implements may take precedence over infrastructure. ••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri46   46

7/7/2009   4:02:17 PM




67

67Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAreas for Consideration

7. Champion the adoption of uniform building 

standards throughout all DMCs.ADB has an opportunity to lead in the area of uniform and technically up-to-date building standards appropriate to catastrophe risk. ADB is in a unique position to launch an initiative as part of its disaster management PPP to work with national disaster authorities to establish a workable set of standards and to offer incentives to DMCs to adopt them. •For example, the Institute of Professional Engineers of New Zealand has proposed the development of a South Pacific–wide set of building codes, with an appropriate training component. ADB could support such an effort and view it as a pilot program for broader efforts at code modernization and enforcement. ADB should also require compliance with internationally respected building codes before a project may receive funding or other assistance.••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri47   47

7/7/2009   4:02:17 PM










6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri48   48

7/7/2009   4:02:21 PM








Appendix I: List of Conference Papers

The full reports and summaries are available at:  www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2008/Catastrophe-Insurance-Mechanisms/program.asp

TitleAuthor

• Leveraging Insurance and Capital Markets Against 

 Natural CatastrophesJonathan HillConsultantAsian Development Bank

• Catastrophe Risk and Insurance Availability: 

 Indonesia Case StudyRionald Silaban(presented by Suprayoga Hadi)National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS), Indonesia

• Catastrophe Risk Financing in Asia and the Pacific: 

 A Regional ApproachAndreas BollmanSwiss Reinsurance Company Ltd.Singapore

• Catastrophe Risk Financing in Asia and the Pacific: 

 The Potential Role of a Regional ApproachFelton JohnstonConsultantAsian Development Bank

• On the Building Blocks of Catastrophe Insurance

Robert Muir-WoodRisk Management Solutions Ltd.United Kingdom

• The Special Nature of Disaster Risk in the Pacific

Russell BlongConsultantAsian Development Bank

• Catastrophe Insurance Triggers—What is the Best Fit 

 for the Asia and Pacific Region?David SimmonsReMetrics, Benfield Group Ltd.United Kingdom

• The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance 

 Facility as a Technical ModelSimon Young and Milo PearsonCaribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, Cayman Islands

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri49   49

7/7/2009   4:02:22 PM




Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific01

01

TitleAuthor

• The Cayman Islands Experience with the Caribbean 

 Catastrophe Risk Insurance FacilityMichael NixonCayman Islands GovernmentPortfolio of Finance and EconomicsCayman Islands

• What do Pacific Developing Member Countries 

 Want from Catastrophe Insurance?Mosese SikivouPacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission, Fiji Islands

• Special Nature of Disaster Risk in Megacities

Michael SprangerMunich Reinsurance Germany

• The Special Nature of Natural Disaster Risk in Asian Megacities 

 and the Case for Megacity Risk PoolingReinhard Mechler, Stefan Hochrainer,  and Keith WilligesInternational Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Austria

• What Asian Member Countries with Megacities Require 

 from a Catastrophe Risk Insurance ProgramJonathan UyNational Economic and Development Authority, Philippines

Appendix I: List of Conference Papers

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri50   50

7/7/2009   4:02:22 PM




01

01

Appendix II: Conference Report Summaries

1Leveraging Insurance and Capital Markets Against Natural CatastrophesJonathan HillIn both reinsurance and capital markets, capacity for Asia and the Pacific’s catastrophe risk is abundant and the convergence of insurance and capital markets further supports catastrophe risk transfer in the region.Three general trigger mechanisms are available for catastrophe risk transfer. These are

(i) indemnity risk transfer—where payments are linked directly to the amount of loss;

(ii) index-linked risk transfer—where payments are linked to a third-party index of insurance industry-wide 

 losses; and

(iii) parametric risk transfer—where payments are provided based solely on the geophysical parameters of 

a catastrophic event, e.g., wind speed, ground-shaking intensity, depth of flood water, temperatures, and others.Legal forms for risk transfer include primary insurance, reinsurance, securitization, and derivatives.Capital market mechanisms may be used alone or as part of a larger risk transfer program, such as a regional risk pool. Parametric catastrophe derivatives could facilitate efficient trading of catastrophe risk among anonymous counterparties.Asia and the Pacific can benefit from leverage in the capital markets directly or indirectly as these are used by reinsurers to improve their capacity and financial strength.Asia and the Pacific countries are encouraged to develop risk transfer products tailored to their particular situations and to optimize these to leverage their present or future global risk–taking capacity.Through decisive action in key areas such as Asian megacities and in large development projects, Asia and the Pacific can leverage existing knowledge, technology, and state-of-the-art capital management systems to build a market tailored to the specific needs of the region.Three general recommendations are provided:

(i) Enact laws and regulations to facilitate stable and secure risk markets.

(ii) Contribute actively to global efforts to set standards.

(iii) Promote technological advances and public information.

Further refinement and additional recommendations are expected as outcomes of the conference.••••••••1

 The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Asian Development Bank 

(ADB), its Board of Governors, or the governments they represent. ADB does not guarantee accuracy of the data included in these papers and accepts no responsibility for any consequence of their use. Terminology used may not necessarily be consistent with ADB official terms. 

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri51   51

7/7/2009   4:02:22 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report Summaries

Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



Catastrophe Risk and Insurance Availability: Indonesia Case Study

Rionald SilabanMinistry of Finance, IndonesiaSuprayoga HadiNational Development Planning Agency, Indonesia Following the recent history of natural disasters in Asia, governments in the region began to adopt comprehensive disaster risk management programs that address both pre- and post-event requirements.Among the new tools to manage and transfer catastrophe risk in Asia are insurance pools. Such pools may be regional or national in nature. One example of a national pool is PT Asuransi MAIPARK Indonesia, an earthquake reinsurance pool formed in 2003. Participation in this pool was made compulsory for all general and reinsurance companies in Indonesia.As part of its program, Indonesia created the National Disaster Management to develop disaster mitigation strategies and fund both pre- and post-event disaster management costs. Advantages of insurance pools include the following: 

(i) coverage of special hazards that are beyond the capacity of individual insurers to pay for,

(ii) a pool’s joint and several liabilities eliminate single-party credit risk, and 

(iii) reinsurance and securitization can be used more creatively.

Obstacles to developing catastrophe risk insurance programs include 

(i) low insurance penetration (estimated at 1.6% of the country’s gross domestic product), 

(ii) reluctance of domestic insurers to cover catastrophes, and 

(iii) lack of government encouragement and/or incentives for homeowners to purchase catastrophe risk 

coverage.Recommendations: 

(i) Increase national catastrophe risk awareness as has been done in Japan.

(ii) Government should mandate homeowners to purchase catastrophe risk coverage.

(iii) Government should shift its programs from reactive to proactive and to focus on local instead of central 

government responsibility. 

(iv) Expand MAIPARK’s mandate beyond earthquake coverage to include other catastrophe risks.

(v) Future actions should take the form of public–private partnerships to develop the private insurance industry.

••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri52   52

7/7/2009   4:02:22 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific

Appendix II: Conference Report Summaries

Catastrophe Risk Financing in Asia and the Pacific: A Regional Approach

 A Private Sector Perspective on ADB’s Potential Roles in the Areas of Catastrophe Risk FinancingAndreas BollmannSwiss Reinsurance Company LimitedThere is significant value in shifting the traditional post-event “disaster relief” approach to one that accumulates funds before a disaster occurs.Relying only on unpredictable international aid inflows in the aftermath of a natural catastrophe can be an extremely dangerous strategy. Aid can never be an appropriate substitute for planned and adequate catastrophe insurance.From a political perspective, there is often a reluctance to invest in catastrophe risk transfer as costs are incurred today while the timing of future payouts is uncertain. Distributing public funds to affected regions and individuals after a natural catastrophe is often more appealing to politicians.Meanwhile, insurance markets in the majority of developing countries are underdeveloped and coverage for natural disasters is limited.Under this scenario, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) could play many roles in ensuring the move toward proactive risk management through catastrophe risk financing. These include

(i) ADB as 

promoter of catastrophe risk management in Asia. ADB is uniquely situated to raise awareness, transfer knowledge, and influence change.

(ii) ADB as 

financier of catastrophe risk transfer instruments by being a buyer of catastrophe risk–transfer instruments to protect its current loan portfolio and projects,a sponsor to jumpstart catastrophe risk–transfer mechanisms, anda provider of technical assistance in catastrophe risk management.

(iii) ADB’s role is not seen as manager of domestic or regional catastrophe risk–insurance facility.

(iv) ADB is seen to have a limited role as a 

guarantor of premium payments for risk transfer instruments.

(v) ADB could be an 

investor in catastrophe bonds.•••••———

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri53   53

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



Catastrophe Risk Financing in Asia and the Pacific: The Potential Role 

 of a Regional ApproachFelton JohnstonCatastrophe risk insurance is an area in which the Asian Development Bank (ADB) can play important roles. ADB currently assists member countries in Asia and the Pacific in developing a regional approach to disaster risk management. Regional activities that could enhance the development of catastrophe risk transfer include knowledge management and capacity building related to natural catastrophe risk,encouraging domestic risk mitigation and avoidance,supporting domestic insurance market development,supporting hazard exposure and vulnerability data development,cooperating with private insurers and development partners to develop risk insurance mechanisms,exploring prospects for pooling catastrophe risks of megacities and pacific islands,supporting the development of regional catastrophe bond market and catastrophe reporting mechanisms,conducting bridging roles in catastrophe bond transactions, andproviding relief for sovereign borrowers either directly or through insurance of their sovereign portfolios.•••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri54   54

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

On the Building Blocks of Catastrophe Insurance 

 —With Relevance to the Asia and Pacific RegionRobert Muir-WoodRisk Management Solutions Ltd.Catastrophe or CAT models are fundamental to catastrophe risk management, including risk pricing, risk transfer structuring, insurer capital adequacy, and risk securitization (through parametric or loss-based triggers).The CAT model creates a “universe” of all possible events, including their areas of impact (footprint) and the vulnerabilities of property, people, or other assets in the path of the catastrophe. The standard output of the CAT model is the exceedance probability relationship (that shows the annual likelihood of a loss being in excess of some magnitude) and its integral (the annualized average loss or its technical risk cost). The development of CAT models has become increasingly technically sophisticated. However, while the essential architecture of the model is simple, there are open-source CAT models and challenges of relating the localized hazards to specific vulnerabilities.CAT model results are extremely sensitive, which is why it is easy to build a bad model. For example, a 1% variation in wind speed (in a hurricane model) makes a 7% variation in loss. A 1-meter difference in elevation of a property may typically make a 50% difference in the technical rate for flood risk. In developing a new commercial CAT model, the period of research and iterative calibration takes much longer than actually assembling the model.While a horizontal resolution of 1–5 kilometers might be appropriate for an earthquake CAT model (except in relation to landslide and liquefaction risks), a flood CAT model will require a horizontal resolution of 100 meters or better, and a vertical resolution of no less than 50 centimeters.For Asia and the Pacific, flood is the principal hazard along with earthquake and typhoon wind. In modeling typhoon impacts, it is important to model the wind, storm surge, and inland flood perils separately as they will have very different microzonation characteristics.For modeling the risk to megacities, high-resolution data are required for land elevations, locations, and vulnerabilities of all properties and infrastructure, river channels and flood defenses, and the characteristics of catchment run-off (and for storm surges in coastal cities).In expanding the creation of CAT models for the developing world, it is important not to compromise on model resolution or on the quality of research and calibration. With the widespread availability of Digital Terrain Models and GoogleEarth, there are many new tools that can assist in efficiently developing good quality models. Given the lack of an agency that vets the quality of CAT models, the Florida Hurricane Commission process remains the only way to check how different modelers build and calibrate their models.••••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri55   55

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific67

67

The Special Nature of Disaster Risk in the Pacific

Russell Blong Natural hazards in the south Pacific include earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, landslides, tropical cyclones, floods, storm surges, drought, and frost. These hazards and their wide-ranging consequences reflect five broad influences: tectonic controls, formation of coral at a narrow range of elevation below sea level, incidence of tropical cyclones, occurrence of El Niño, and to a more limited extent, global warming.Natural hazard losses are usually small but for small economies, these could reach several times their annual gross domestic product and can regularly average half their normal gross domestic product growth, thereby significantly limiting their economic development.Tropical cyclones and earthquakes are probably the most significant natural hazards in terms of death and damage. However, the actual cause of most deaths and damages in the Pacific countries may be storm surge, riverine flood, tsunami, or landslides rather than strong winds and ground shaking.State-of-the-art building codes for cyclone winds and earthquake ground shaking may limit death tolls and building damage but much less than casual investigation suggests.Catastrophe insurance that provides payments to governments using simple measures of wind speed and ground shaking will fail to compensate adequately when storm surge, riverine flood, tsunami, or landslide produce greater consequences.••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri56   56

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




67

67Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

Catastrophe Insurance Triggers

 —What is the Best Fit for the Asia and Pacific Region?David SimmonsReMetrics, Benfield Group Ltd.The paper discusses the different types of catastrophe triggers available in the reinsurance and capital markets, namely

(i) indemnity,

(ii) pure parametric,

(iii) parametric index,

(iv) modeled loss, and

(v) market index.

Indemnity covers are those coverages where basis risk may be reduced to near zero but requires the insured to maintain an accurate inventory of risks and to be able to quantify loss.Pure parametric covers have no explicit link to the actual or potential loss suffered by the insured; rather, payment is made if a predefined event occurs. Such covers, which use triggering measures such as wind speed or ground shaking at point locations, however, contain the greatest basis risk, but their simplicity is welcomed by the markets and may be rewarded by greater capacity and lower premiums. The paper presents the case study of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). The CCRIF selected a parametric index approach, favoring speed of settlement and transparency of loss calculation over any basis risk (i.e., the risk that a loss may be suffered but one which the parametric index does not trigger, so no recovery is made).A parametric index uses transparent, published formula to calculate an index, which is aimed to map closely a likely loss. This should reduce basis risk but increases complexity.A modeled loss basis is similar to parametric index except that the loss is calculated by a named, fixed proprietary model. Again, it is hoped that basis risk is significantly reduced but at the cost of transparency.A market index trigger is based on market losses. If available, market loss and exposure data may be segmented (e.g., by region) to allow more complex market share calculations. Market loss contracts can be the most freely tradable (e.g., Industry Loss Warranties or US ILWs) but basis risk can be huge and these rely on good market data.A model is the key to all catastrophe business. Its function is to assess the likely attachment and exhaustion of a cover, its average recovery, and the variability of those recoveries. A pure parametric cover may require a relatively simple model but it must be credible. A full proprietary peril model is usually applied to minimize the basis risk, even for an indemnity trigger. Investors and rating agencies normally prefer the modeling to be done by known names such as RMS, EQECAT, and AIR.••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri57   57

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific



In Asia, the lack of a reliable, recognized modeler is a hurdle for many countries. This implies the need for a simpler 

parametric or parametric index product for some countries and for perils. Where more than one model exists, it is likely that they disagree. Unlike reinsurers, capital markets have been, so far, relatively insensitive to this though this is likely to change.Care must be taken as to which perils are included in the trigger. Traditional indemnity covers often have broad coverage with minor perils included, even if not adequately modeled, for little or no additional premium. Parametric covers are more defined but they could miss the peril (or subsidiary peril) that causes the bulk of the loss, e.g., fire following earthquake, or flood following typhoon.••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri58   58

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM






Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility as a Technical Model

Simon Young and Milo PearsonCaribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance FacilityThe Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) is designed to provide short-term liquidity needs to Caribbean governments due to loss from tropical cyclones and earthquakes. The CCRIF offers parametric policies because 

(i) payouts can be calculated and made quickly, 

(ii) calculation of payouts is objective, and 

(iii) risk is uniformly defined. 

For tropical cyclones, damage is based on wind speed and is a proxy for loss. Currently, there is no coverage for storm surge or flood-induced damage. The Dynamic Financial Analysis model is a valuable tool for determining survivability and sustainability of a catastrophe fund and is particularly flexible as the program begins to fully develop. Developing accurate exposure data can be a challenge in many parts of the world. Hence, it is important to involve local experts in such work to help obtain and confirm the accuracy of data. If possible, storm surge and excess rainfall should be explicitly modeled and included in the policy. The CCRIF experiences show that considerable damage can occur from storm surge and rainfall from tropical cyclones—the type of losses that policies do not trigger because wind speeds do not exceed the attachment point.Clear and consistent communication with stakeholders is paramount. Government participants should view a program such as the CCRIF as only one tool in their efforts to mitigate financial loss from natural catastrophes. Efforts to obtain government commitments to join a catastrophe fund should include the use of local expertise and knowledge. The CCRIF used a consortium of organizations with considerable local experience during its development and implementation phases and it paid great dividends. •••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri59   59

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific6061

6061

The Cayman Islands Experience with the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility

Michael NixonCayman Islands Government Portfolio of Finance and EconomicsCayman Islands’ Exposure to Natural Catastrophe RisksMitigation of Financial Risks Associated with Catastrophe Risk Exposures

(i) Property Insurance

(ii) Reserve Funds

(iii) Physical Mitigation Measures

Launch of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF)

(i) Regional initiative supported by the World Bank and international donor community

(ii) Challenges of Achieving Regional Consensus

CCRIF: Cost–Benefit Analysis

(i) Alternative Risk Transfer Options

(ii) Fiscal Policy Considerations

Why CCRIF is Attractive

(i) Benefits of Risk Pooling

(ii) Parametric Insurance

The Cayman Islands’ Experience with CCRIF: Year One

(i) Communication and/or Dialogue 

(ii) Challenges: Managing Expectations versus Reality

CCRIF Enhancements

(i) Wider Coverage

(ii) Higher Initial Payouts

CCRIF Recommendations 

(i) Understand the Risk Exposure

(ii) Apply a Diversified Approach to Catastrophe Risk Management

(iii) Conduct Territory–Specific Cost–Benefit Analysis

(iv) CCRIF not the Only Solution

(v) Create a Forum for Communication

••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri60   60

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




6061

6061Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

What Do Pacific Developing Member Countries Want from Catastrophe Insurance?

Mosese Sikivou Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience CommissionInitial studies on catastrophe insurance in the Pacific were undertaken around 2000. These studies were prompted by the Pacific Forum Economic Ministers’ Meetings (FEMM) which looked at a catastrophe risk–insurance pool as just one in the range of financial risk–transfer and/or risk–sharing mechanisms that can be developed either on a national or a regional basis. FEMM encouraged putting priority on the implementation of strategies, enabling public policy, the use of the private insurance market, and expenditure on hazard assessment and risk management.There is a need for better interface between insurance and risk management (including financial risk management), which can be achieved through regional and national capacity building, to address the following issues and challenges:

(i) Developing a management structure that creates appropriate interface between finance management, 

insurance management, and disaster management, with institutional arrangements that link national and regional level structures, and such structure should promote government–private sector partnership.

(ii) Raising national capacity in financial risk analysis since disaster managers do not practice day-to-day risk 

management, hence, risk management culture in government is hardly instilled. Risk reduction measures should be mandatory in development planning and projects while risk management should be linked with government budgeting and legal processes.

(iii) Establishing systematic data collection and management systems to build databases at national level. 

(iv) Identifying the legislative, institutional, and operational framework to support the establishment and 

management of catastrophe risk insurance, and to strengthen the regulation of the insurance industry.

(v) Strengthening the standards of good governance since moral hazards and bureaucracy are risks that must 

be reduced at all levels of the fund’s operation, e. g., inflated assessment, unplanned expenditure, and political interference. 

(vi) Understanding of catastrophe insurance options, in particular, understanding insurance pool fund and the 

benefits of product diversification (done through fund interface with existing loss-sharing approaches as in supporting the National Disaster Relief Fund, with development banks, and microinsurance).

(vii) Understanding all the preparatory works and attached costs needed to sustain catastrophe risk insurance.

Pacific developing member countries (PDMCs) are interested in the meaningful articulation of key technical and administrative issues by defining premium and affordable pricing with regard to:

(i) 

the interdependency of deductibles and retained risk with the preparedness of a country (i.e., the efficiency of contingency and emergency plans and its impact on insurance pricing). Government financial risks are contained in assets, revenue, personnel, and liabilities, and there will be movement of retained risk (attrition) if there are trends to privatize public services and rent office premises; 

(ii) 

the inclusion of content and business interruption of governments since they generally carry the liability for national economic losses; 

(iii) the limit of what the economies of PDMCs can afford and the benefits to donors that support a regional fund 

pool; and

(iv) consultations, advocacy, and awareness-raising activities at national, regional, and international levels.

•••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri61   61

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific66

66

PDMCs’ venture into catastrophe risk insurance require the following: a good damage database and economic 

impact modeling, a high-level lobbying and sensitization activities, a guarantee for the pool funds, a diversification of products to support existing approaches, and the establishment of a regulatory and management framework. There is high expectation these would be addressed in the ongoing World Bank’s Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pool Project Initiative. A regional catastrophe insurance scheme will need the strong support of donors and multilateral lending institutions. The South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission supports this conference as being very timely for the recent and current initiatives.••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri62   62

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




66

66Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

Special Nature of Disaster Risk in Megacities

Michael SprangerMunich ReinsuranceMain TrendsIn 1950, the world was home to 2.6 billion people. Today, this number has grown to 6.6 billion and by 2050, it will probably increase by another 40% to 9.2 billion people.At the same time, people are becoming wealthier and more productive while urbanization is increasing at an unprecedented scale.The number of natural catastrophes is increasing. About one-third of these catastrophes occur in Asia. However, the insured losses in Asia are only about 10% of the worldwide insured losses yet registered about 70% of all fatalities, highlighting the vulnerability of Asia to natural catastrophes. Since 1980, more than 1 million people perished in Asia because of natural catastrophes, accounting for more number than in all other continents together. But not only has the number of registered events increased, it is well documented that the economic and insured losses are rapidly increasing as well.Special Risk MegacitiesMegacities present major opportunities because for every high-rise building, underground railway system, manufacturing company, and people who live and work in these cities, there is a need for insurance. Given that the density of insurance in the megacities of developing countries is still far lower than in industrialized countries, the business potential for the insurance industry is large. The risks that go hand in hand with global urbanization, however, are also large.Owing to the high concentration of people, values, and infrastructure in a very confined area, the loss potential in megacities are very much higher than in rural areas. Consequently, even small occurrences can cause severe losses.The long-term risks are also much more serious  with many megacities being virtually predestined to suffer major natural disasters.The ever-increasing global interdependence in the flow of goods, finance, and information—especially in cities, which are also economic centers—harbors major risks. Depending on the degree of global interconnection, a business interruption in an Asian metropolis can lead to production losses in Australia, Europe, or elsewhere in the world.For international reinsurers, the main risk associated with megacities is the accumulation risk, i.e., when a single loss occurrence can also have far-reaching negative consequences for other economic sectors.••••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri63   63

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report Summaries

Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific6465

6465

Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches: Risk Index

The role of insurance is to provide tools to minimize risk and to maximize awareness.Two approaches help make the risks transparent: bottom–up and top–down. On the one hand, there is geospatial analysis, which allows risks to be recorded for small areas, and on the other hand, there is an index that makes it possible for the potential extent of a loss in a megacity to be assessed in its entirety.The Munich Re risk index is geared for the risk of material losses without including the insurance density or the insurance terms and conditions. Its modular structure means that the index can easily be adapted for either underwriting or other purposes. It enables the risk potential to be identified quickly and makes risks comparable  and transparent.High-quality geospatial analysis of portfolio and claims data is crucial for risk management and portfolio optimization in businesses that involve natural hazards. Geocoding may be performed using various levels of detail such as countries, postal codes, towns, and addresses. For megacities, however, “coarse” geocoding (e.g., at country or at region level) is not sufficient.Geocoded liability data is also helpful in evaluating risks of change (e.g., risk of thunderstorm in connection with climate change).•••••

7th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri64   64

7/8/2009   12:01:13 PM




66

66Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

The Special Nature of Natural Disaster Risk in Asian Megacities 

 and the Case for Megacity Risk PoolingReinhard Mechler, Stefan Hochrainer, and Keith WilligesInternational Institute for Applied Systems AnalysisThe paper examines the general nature of natural disaster risk in the context of megacities with special attention to Asia. It discusses the special characteristics of megacities that may alter catastrophe risk management such as urban growth, migration, geolocation, and climate change. The megacity disaster risk, particularly in developing countries, was found to be highly dynamic, difficult to assess, often comprising of substantial informal risks, and risk management uptake is low, among others, due to lack of incentives.Recently, there emerged an interest in exploring whether megacity disaster risk may be suitable for a donor-assisted, regional Asian risk pooling scheme that is broadly similar to what was done in the Caribbean. The paper suggests that a key risk financing opportunity may relate to insuring public sector liabilities for infrastructure, liquidity support, and relief to population as conducted in the Caribbean regional pooling of hurricane and earthquake risk, and by the Government of Mexico for earthquake risk.The rationale and key constraints to such deliberations were assessed, given the highly dynamic nature of vulnerability and risk, and conditions for conducting similar transactions for Asian megacity risk were discussed.The paper suggests further discussion of the following issues at the conference:

(i) the case and/or demand for megacity risk financing and risk pooling,

(ii) the types of disaster risk to insure,

(iii) urban governance and financial authority,

(iv) the scope for regional risk diversification, and

(v) harnessing of regional institutional capacity for regional cooperation on ri

sk financing.••••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri65   65

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




Appendix II: Conference Report SummariesNatural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific6667

6667

What Asian Member Countries with Megacities Require 

 from a Catastrophe Risk Insurance ProgramJonathan Uy



National Economic and Development Authority  PhilippinesThe Philippines is one of the countries in Asia and the Pacific with the fastest-growing and dense urban concentrations. Approximately half of the country’s population resides on the island of Luzon. Manila, the country’s capital, is considered the 11th most populous metropolitan area in the world.  Because of its geographic location and archipelagic situation, the Philippines is one of the countries that is highly vulnerable to various types of disasters. Tropical cyclones, flood, and earthquake (seismic activity) are among the top three natural hazards experienced by the country for the past several decades.With the rise of urbanization and population in a megacity like Manila, there has been a parallel increase in urban infrastructure and technology which are exposed to a variety of risks and tremendous exposure to catastrophic disturbances such as seismic activities. At present, the cost of infrastructure is getting more expensive as the cost of technology increases and disturbance to processes and transactions is deemed to decrease opportunities and productivity. The approximate total building value in Metro Manila, based on a 90-million square meter total floor area, is $20 billion.For developing countries with less financial resources, catastrophic events may result in higher public deficits and debt. In cases where the national government needs to augment the resources of the local levels, the government’s financial status and capacity are highly exposed to risks because of the costly and cumbersome efforts of disaster recovery.In disaster risk management, investing in insurance mechanisms is recognized as one of the options in managing risks of natural hazards and disasters. However, the insurance market only provides catastrophe or disaster insurance coverage to a few governments mainly because the insurance premiums are high and the degree of damage is difficult to measure.Despite social and fiscal exposure and vulnerability of the country to natural disaster, insurance penetration remains low. In 2000, the nonlife insurance premium collected was $458 million, which accounts for only 0.6% of the gross domestic product.It is imperative to revisit existing mechanisms in addressing or managing disasters for effectiveness and efficiency. The option to establish a proactive approach in transferring risk must be considered because the cost of disaster relief and rehabilitation is increasing.At present, the major source of funding for disaster recovery efforts are the National Calamity Fund and the  Local Calamity Fund (LCF) whose resources have been increasing since 2004. From 2006 to 2008 alone, the National Calamity Fund has a total of $32.71 million or an average increase of $16.40 million equivalent to 112% per year. Also, 5% of the annual budget of the local government units is set aside for the LCF. For ••••••••2

 Jonathan L. Uy is director of the National Economic and Development Authority’s (NEDA) Public Investment Staff. This paper was written in 

collaboration with Rachelle C. Cerrera and Jonah Karl R. Manalang of the same office.

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri66   66

7/7/2009   4:02:23 PM




6667

6667Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance  Mechanisms for Asia and the PacificAppendix II: Conference Report Summaries

the same period, the total LCF was $50.92 million or an annual average increase of $25.46 million. These 

government resources could be pooled as part of the catastrophe risk insurance program for the country.The proactive or pre-event response in managing disaster is by pooling of government resources before catastrophe occurs. Financial and insurance markets can play a key role in preparing for the impact of natural catastrophic events and in helping spread the risks to lessen the burden of the government.The private sector or the insurance market’s involvement is vital in the development of risk transfer mechanisms but the cost of insurance premiums in developing countries is high, coupled with market imperfections. The challenge is getting the insurance industry involved in sharing the risks of catastrophe and natural disasters.One of the key challenges in disaster management is the preparedness of developing or middle-income countries with megacities in addressing the financial gaps brought about by natural disasters and/or catastrophe. This is an opportunity for development partners and the insurance market to provide assistance by guaranteeing and ensuring the government’s pool of resources, by extending models, and by sharing best practices.For the Philippines, it is clear that market maturity has yet to be developed for catastrophe risk insurance mechanisms but the national government is increasingly providing resources at the subnational government levels to be able to respond to local disasters. An initiative for setting up a regional mechanism for intercountry cooperation and cross-insurance among the neighbor countries may be an initial platform for cooperation in the development of a regional catastrophe risk–insurance mechanism.••••

6th proof Natural Catastrophe Ri67   67

7/7/2009   4:02:24 PM




Printed in the Philippinesfor Asia and the PacificNatural CatastropheRisk Insurance Mechanisms

Printed in the Philippines

Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific—Main ReportNatural catastrophes are a major threat to sustainable development, especially in Asia and the Pacific. ADB’s developing member countries are particularly vulnerable. Catastrophe risk could be transferred through a regional public–private insurance partnership. This is the key finding of the Asian Development Bank Conference on Natural Catastrophe Risk Insurance Mechanisms for Asia and the Pacific held in Tokyo in November 2008.This report answers questions about disaster risk management and shows how ADB can ease access to catastrophe risk transfer mechanisms. It also suggests that a regional approach is an appropriate mechanism to bridge existing gaps and to unlock resources needed to better manage risk.About the Asian Development BankADB’s vision is an Asia and Pacific region free of poverty. Its mission is to help its developing member countries substantially reduce poverty and improve the quality of life of their people. Despite the region’s many successes, it remains home to two thirds of the world’s poor: 1.8 billion people who live on less than $2 a day, with 903 million struggling on less than $1.25 a day. ADB is committed to reducing poverty through inclusive economic growth, environmentally sustainable growth, and regional integration.      Based in Manila, ADB is owned by 67 members, including 48 from the region. Its main instruments for helping its developing member countries are policy dialogue, loans, equity investments, guarantees, grants, and technical assistance. 

Asian Development Bank6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City1550 Metro Manila, Philippineswww.adb.orgISBN 978-971-561-799-4Publication Stock No. RPT090284Main Report




This chapter provides an overview of the history of catastrophe
models and their role in risk assessment and management of natural disasters.
It examines the insurability of catastrophe risk and illustrates how the output
from catastrophe models aids insurers in meeting their goals for risk
management. Throughout the chapter, there is an emphasis on understanding
catastrophe modeling for earthquake and hurricane hazards and how it is used
to manage natural hazard risk. In the final section, a framework for integrating
risk assessment with risk management via catastrophe modeling is presented.
2.1 History of Catastrophe Models
Catastrophe modeling is not rooted in one field or discipline. The
science of assessing and managing catastrophe risk originates in the fields of
property insurance and the science of natural hazards. Insurers may well argue
that catastrophe modeling’s history lies in the earliest days of property
insurance coverage for fire and lightning. In the 1800’s, residential insurers
managed their risk by mapping the structures that they covered. Not having
access to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software, they used tacks on
a wall-hung map to indicate their concentration of exposure. This crude
technique served insurers well and limited their risk. Widespread usage of
mapping ended in the 1960’s when it became too cumbersome and timeconsuming
to execute (Kozlowski and Mathewson, 1995).
On the other hand, a seismologist or meteorologist may well argue
that the origin of catastrophe modeling lies in the modern science of
understanding the nature and impact of natural hazards. In particular, the
common practice of measuring an earthquake’s magnitude and a hurricane’s
intensity is one of the key ingredients in catastrophe modeling. A standard set of metrics for a given hazard must be established so that risks can be assessed
and managed. This measurement began in the 1800’s, when the first modern
seismograph (measuring earthquake ground motion) was invented and
modern versions of the anemometer (measuring wind speed) gained
widespread usage.
In the first part of the twentieth century, scientific measures of natural
hazards advanced rapidly. By the 1970’s, studies theorizing on the source and
frequency of events were published. Significant analyses include the U.S.
Water Resources Council publication on flood hazard (USWRC, 1967), the
Algermissen study on earthquake risk (Algermissen, 1969) and National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) hurricane forecasts
(Neumann, 1972). These developments led U.S. researchers to compile hazard
and loss studies, estimating the impact of earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, and
other natural disasters. Notable compilations include Brinkmann’s summary
of hurricane hazards in the United States (1975) and Steinbrugge’s anthology
of losses from earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunamis (1982).
These two separate developments – mapping risk and measuring
hazard – came together in a definitive way in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s,
through catastrophe modeling as shown in Figure 2.1. Computer-based
models for measuring catastrophe loss potential were developed by linking
scientific studies of natural hazards’ measures and historical occurrences with
advances in information technology and geographic information systems
(GIS). The models provided estimates of catastrophe losses by overlaying the
properties at risk with the potential natural hazard(s) sources in the geographic
area. With the ability to store and manage vast amounts of spatially referenced
information, GIS became an ideal environment for conducting easier and
more cost-effective hazard and loss studies.
Around the same time, several new modeling firms developed
computer software for analyzing the implications of natural hazard risk. Three
major firms emerged: AIR Worldwide was founded in 1987 in Boston; Risk
Management Solutions (RMS) was formed in 1988 at Stanford University;
and EQECAT began in San Francisco in 1994 as a subsidiary of EQE
International. In 2001, EQE International became a part of ABS Consulting.
When introduced, the use of catastrophe models was not widespread.
In 1989, two large-scale disasters occurred that instigated a flurry of activity
in the advancement and use of these models. On September 21, 1989,
Hurricane Hugo hit the coast of South Carolina, devastating the towns of
Charleston and Myrtle Beach. Insured loss estimates totaled $4 billion before
the storm moved through North Carolina the next day (Insurance Information
Institute, 2000). Less than a month later, on October 17, 1989, the Loma
Prieta Earthquake occurred at the southern end of the San Francisco
peninsula. Property damage to the surrounding Bay Area was estimated at $6
billion (Stover and Coffman, 1993).These two disasters sent a warning signal to the insurance industry.
On the heels of these two events, Hurricane Andrew made landfall in
Southern Florida in August of 1992. Within hours of landfall, AIR Worldwide
issued a fax to its clients to the effect that losses, as estimated in real time by
the AIR Worldwide hurricane model, might reach the astonishing amount of
$13 billion. It was not until months later that the final tally, $15.5 billion, was
issued by the Property Claim Services Office.
Nine insurers became insolvent as a result of their losses from
Hurricane Andrew. Insurers and reinsurers realized that, in order to remain in
business, they needed to estimate and manage their natural hazard risk more
precisely. Many companies turned to the modelers of catastrophe risk for
decision support. The modeling companies grew and catastrophe models
increased in number, availability, and capability. By 2001, other organizations
joined these front-runners in developing catastrophe models for assisting
insurers and reinsurers in pricing their insurance policies and determining
how much coverage to offer in hazard-prone areas of the country.
The series of natural disasters in 1989 and 1992 also sent a warning
signal to the public sector of the United States. The government recognized
the need for an accurate assessment of the impact of disasters for mitigation
and emergency planning purposes. In 1992, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) funded a study to assess the latest loss
estimation methodologies for earthquakes. The agency issued a report in 1994
on the results of this study entitled: Assessment of the State of the Art
Earthquake Loss Estimation Methodologies (FEMA 249, 1994).This study convinced FEMA to fund the development of “Hazards
U.S.” (HAZUS), a catastrophe model in the public domain. HAZUS is
labeled as an open source model in Figure 2.1. From the outset, one of
FEMA’s goals was to create a methodology that was the “standard national
loss methodology for assessing losses from natural hazards” (FEMA, 2002).
The first version of HAZUS was developed with a combination of public and
private resources to estimate earthquake losses and was released in 1997
(NIBS, 1997). Updates to the HAZUS earthquake model have been in the
form of data and software integration; methodologically, the software remains
the same. In 2004, the latest HAZUS multi-hazard methodology, relabeled
HAZUS-MH, integrates the earthquake module with two new modules for
estimating potential losses from wind and flood (riverine and coastal) hazards.
2.2 Structure of Catastrophe Models
The four basic components of a catastrophe model are: hazard,
inventory, vulnerability, and loss as depicted in Figure 2.2. First, the model
characterizes the risk of natural hazard phenomena. For example, an
earthquake hazard is characterized by its epicenter location and moment
magnitude, along with other relevant parameters. A hurricane is characterized
by its projected path and wind speed. The frequency of certain magnitudes or
frequencies of events also describes the hazard in question.Structure of Catastrophe Models
The four basic components of a catastrophe model are: hazard,
inventory, vulnerability, and loss as depicted in Figure 2.2. First, the model
characterizes the risk of natural hazard phenomena. For example, an
earthquake hazard is characterized by its epicenter location and moment
magnitude, along with other relevant parameters. A hurricane is characterized
by its projected path and wind speed. The frequency of certain magnitudes or
frequencies of events also describes the hazard in question.Structure of Catastrophe Models
The four basic components of a catastrophe model are: hazard,
inventory, vulnerability, and loss as depicted in Figure 2.2. First, the model
characterizes the risk of natural hazard phenomena. For example, an
earthquake hazard is characterized by its epicenter location and moment
magnitude, along with other relevant parameters. A hurricane is characterized
by its projected path and wind speed. The frequency of certain magnitudes or
frequencies of events also describes the hazard in question.Next, the model characterizes the inventory or portfolio of properties
at risk as accurately as possible. Arguably, the most important parameter used
to characterize the inventory is the location of each property at risk. A process
called geocoding is normally used to assign geographic coordinates such as
latitude and longitude to a property based on its street address, ZIP code or
another location descriptor. With a property’s location in spatial terms, other
factors that could aid in estimating the vulnerability of a property are added to
its characterization. For a building, these parameters include such features as
its construction type, the number of stories in the structure, and its age. If the property is insured, information on the nature of the policy, such as the
deductible and coverage limit, is also recorded.
The hazard and inventory modules enable the calculation of the
vulnerability or susceptibility to damage of the structures at risk. In essence,
this step in the model quantifies the physical impact of the natural hazard
phenomenon on the property at risk. How this vulnerability is quantified
differs from model to model. For example, the HAZUS model classifies a
structure as being in a Slight, Moderate, Extensive, or Complete damage state.
Other models construct damage curves and relate structural damage to a
severity parameter, such as peak gust wind speed or spectral acceleration. In
all models, damage curves are constructed for the building, its contents and
time element losses, such as business interruption loss or relocation expenses.
From this measure of vulnerability, the loss to the inventory is
evaluated. In a catastrophe model, loss is characterized as direct or indirect in
nature. Direct losses include the cost to repair and/or replace a structure.
Indirect losses include business interruption impacts and relocation costs of
residents forced to evacuate their homes. Proprietary models include the
ability to analyze insurance policies, so that the loss can be properly allocated.
More details on these elements of a catastrophe model are provided in
Chapter 3.
2.3 Uses of a Catastrophe Model for Risk Management
A catastrophe model is employed to assess catastrophe risk and
improve risk management decisions. But how is this accomplished? Briefly,
the model output is quantified and presented in a way that is useful to the
stakeholder. Once these metrics are in hand, alternate risk management
strategies, such as mitigation, insurance, reinsurance and catastrophe bonds,
can be assessed. Currently, insurers and reinsurers are the stakeholders with
the most widespread interest and integrated use of catastrophe models.
Reinsurance brokers in particular have enhanced the use of catastrophe
models. It is fairly common for a broker to collect data for potential clients,
run the models on that data, and provide the output to interested reinsurers.
The capital markets have also been eager users of this technology in
order to more accurately price catastrophe bonds. In fact, their recent interest
and involvement in natural hazards have been made possible by the
quantification afforded by catastrophe modeling. Property owners are less
likely to use catastrophe models themselves, but their decision processes are
directly or indirectly influenced by the outcomes. At the governmental level,
catastrophe modeling presents both a positive opportunity and a political
dilemma for regulators and emergency management agencies.
As an example of a positive use of the models, consider the use of
HAZUS to measure the impact of an earthquake. One model output option is to create a GIS map of the potential loss. Given the definition of the hazard,
including the earthquake’s epicenter location, and the concentration of the
properties at risk, Figure 2.3 depicts a map of the displaced households for the
Charleston, South Carolina region subject to an M 7.3 earthquake. The largest
concentration of loss, measured by the number of individuals seeking shelter
following the disaster, is near the scenario’s epicenter. This map is potentially
useful to emergency response and recovery officials responding to a disaster.Another output option is the exceedance probability (EP) curve. For a
given portfolio of structures at risk, an EP curve is a graphical representation
of the probability that a certain level of loss will be surpassed in a given time
period. Special attention is given to the right-hand tail of this curve where the
largest losses are situated. Figure 2.4 depicts an EP curve for an insurer with a
portfolio of residential earthquake policies in Long Beach, California. In
contrast to a GIS map of loss, which presents loss in a spatial manner, an
exceedance probability curve portrays loss in a temporal manner.
An EP curve is particularly valuable for insurers and reinsurers to
determine the size and distribution of their portfolios’ potential losses. Based
on the EP curve, they can determine the types and locations of buildings they
would like to insure, what coverage to offer, and what price to charge. To keep the probability of insolvency at an acceptable level, insurers can also use
an EP curve to determine what proportion of their risk needs to be transferred
to either a reinsurer and/or the capital markets.
For example, suppose an insurer in Long Beach offers residential
earthquake coverage and the insurer’s exceedance probability curve for its
portfolio is as depicted in Figure 2.4. Further suppose the insurer specifies
$10 million as an acceptable level of loss at a 1% (1-in-100) probability of
exceedance. Based on the graph, it can be seen that loss profile of the current
portfolio would be unacceptable since the 1-in-100 loss for the portfolio is
$ 15 million. The insurer would need to look for ways to reduce its portfolio,
transfer $5 million of loss to a reinsurer, or purchase a catastrophe bond to
cover it.Insurability of Catastrophe Risks
In most developed countries, insurance is one of the principal
mechanisms used by individuals and organizations to manage risk. Insurance
allows the payment of a relatively small premium for protection against a
potentially large loss in the future. In the United States, some property
insurance coverage is required by law or by the lending institution. For
example, homeowners normally have to purchase fire coverage as a condition
for a mortgage. Automobile liability insurance is also required in most states as a condition for licensing a car. However, earthquake insurance is usually
not required by lenders on single-family residences.
Insurance pricing can be a signal of how risky certain activities are
for a particular individual. To illustrate, consider automobile insurance. For
cars that are the same price, younger, inexperienced drivers of sporty vehicles
pay more in premiums than older drivers of more conservative cars. For life
and health insurance, smokers pay more for coverage than nonsmokers. This
allocation of risk seems appropriate since it is tied to the likelihood of
outcomes resulting from the nature of an individual’s lifestyle. If one
individual is more susceptible to a specific risk, then the cost for coverage
against a loss from that risk is greater. Of course, since insurance rates are
subject to regulation, the price of the policy may not fully reflect the
underlying risk.
The key challenge is how to allocate catastrophe risk among
stakeholders in a manner similar to what is done for more frequent, nonextreme
events. For automobile coverage, considerable historical data are
available and utilized to estimate insurance premiums for individuals with
different risk characteristics. The large number of data points and the absence
of correlation between accidents allow the use of actuarial-based models to
estimate risk (Panjer and Willmot, 1992). With respect to natural disasters,
there are limited data available to determine the probabilities of events
occurring and their likely outcomes. In the absence of past data, there is a
need for insurers to model the risk. Catastrophe models serve this purpose by
maximizing the use of available information on the risk (hazard and
inventory) to estimate the potential losses from natural hazards.
2.5.1 Conditions for Insurability of a Risk
Consider a standard insurance policy whereby premiums are paid at
the start of a given time period to cover losses during this interval. Two
conditions must be met before insurance providers are willing to offer
coverage against an uncertain event. The first condition is the ability to
identify and quantify, or estimate at least partially, the chances of the event
occurring and the extent of losses likely to be incurred. The second condition
is the ability to set premiums for each potential customer or class of
customers.
If both conditions are satisfied, a risk is considered to be insurable.
But it still may not be profitable. In other words, it may be impossible to
specify a rate for which there is sufficient demand and incoming revenue to
cover the development, marketing, operating, and claims processing costs of
the insurance and yield a net positive profit over a prespecified time horizon.
In such cases, the insurer will opt not to offer coverage against this risk.
To satisfy the first condition, estimates must be made of the
frequency of specific events and the likely extent of losses. Such estimates can be based on past data or catastrophe modeling, coupled with data on what
experts know about a particular risk. The insurer can then construct an
exceedance probability (EP) curve that depicts the probability that a certain
level of loss will be exceeded on an annual basis.
With respect to the second condition, if there is considerable
ambiguity or uncertainty associated with the risk, insurers may wish to charge
a much higher premium than if they had more precise estimates of the risk
(Kunreuther, Hogarth and Meszaros, 1995). Moreover, if the capacity of the
insurance industry is reduced due to recent large losses, then premiums will
rise due to a shortage in supply. The situation will be exacerbated if the recent
losses trigger an increase in demand for coverage, as was the case after
Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the Northridge earthquake in 1994
(Kunreuther and Roth, Sr. 1998).
Once the risk is estimated, the insurer needs to determine a premium
rate that yields a profit and avoids an unacceptable level of loss. There are a
number of factors that influence an insurer’s decision on what premium to set.
State regulations often limit insurers in their rate-setting process, and
competition can play a role in what may be charged in a given marketplace.
Even in the absence of these influences, there are a number of issues that an
insurer must consider in setting premiums: uncertainty of losses, highly
correlated losses, adverse selection, and moral hazard. Neither adverse
selection nor moral hazard appears to be a major problem with respect to
natural hazard risks. Adverse selection occurs when the insurer cannot
distinguish (or does not discriminate through price) between the expected
losses for different categories of risk, while the insured, possessing
information unknown to the insurer, selects a price/coverage option more
favorable to the insured. Moral hazard refers to an increase in the expected
loss caused by the behavior of the policyholder. One example of moral hazard
is moving unwanted furniture into the basement so an impending flood can
destroy it, but this behavior occurs very infrequently. Given the difficulty
uncertainty of losses and highly correlated losses pose in setting premiums,
they are discussed below.
2.5.2 Uncertainty of Losses
Natural disasters pose a set of challenging problems for insurers
because they involve potentially high losses that are extremely uncertain.
Figure 2.8 illustrates the total number of loss events from 1950 to 2000 in the
United States for three prevalent hazards: earthquakes, floods, and hurricanes.
Events were selected that had at least $ 1 billion of economic damage and/or
over 50 deaths (American Re, 2002).
Looking across all the disasters of a particular type (earthquake,
hurricane or flood), for this 50-year period, the median loss is low while the
maximum loss is very high. Given this wide variation in loss distribution, it is Highly Correlated Losses
Natural disasters involve spatially correlated losses or the
simultaneous occurrence of many losses from a single event. If insurers sell a
block of residential policies in a neighborhood, they could potentially
experience a large (spatially correlated) loss should a disaster occur in the
region. For example, due to their high concentration of homeowners’ policies
in the Miami/Dade County area of Florida, State Farm and Allstate Insurance
paid $3.6 billion and $2.3 billion in claims respectively in the wake of
Hurricane Andrew in 1992. Given this unexpectedly high loss, both
companies began to reassess their strategies of providing coverage against
wind damage in hurricane-prone areas (Lecomte and Gahagan, 1998).
In general, insurance markets flourish when companies can issue a
large number of policies whose losses are spatially and otherwise
independent. The portfolio follows the law of large numbers, and is thus
predictable. This law states that for a series of independent and identically
distributed random variables, the variance around the mean of the random
variables decreases as the number of variables increases. Losses from natural
hazards do not follow the law of large numbers, as they are not independent.Determining Whether to Provide Coverage
In his study, James Stone (1973) sheds light on insurers’ decision
rules as to when they would market coverage for a specific risk. Stone
indicates that firms are interested in maximizing expected profits subject to
satisfying a constraint related to the survival of the firm. He also introduces a
constraint regarding the stability of the insurer’s operation. However, insurers
have traditionally not focused on this constraint in dealing with catastrophic
risks.
Following the disasters of 1989, insurers focused on the survival
constraint in determining the amount of catastrophe coverage they wanted to
provide. Moreover, insurers were caught off guard with respect to the
magnitude of the losses from Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the Northridge
earthquake in 1994. In conjunction with the insolvencies that resulted from
these disasters, the demand for coverage increased. Insurers only marketed
coverage against wind damage in Florida because they were required to do so
and state insurance pools were formed to limit their risk. Similarly, the
California Earthquake Authority enabled the market to continue to offer
earthquake coverage in California.
An insurer satisfies the survival constraint by choosing a portfolio of
risks with an overall expected probability of insolvency less than some
threshold, A simple example illustrates how an insurer would utilize the
survival constraint to determine whether the earthquake risk is insurable.
Assume that all homes in an earthquake-prone area are equally resistant to
damage such that the insurance premium, z, is the same for each structure.
Further assume that an insurer has $A dollars in current surplus and wants to
determine the number of policies it can write and still satisfy its survival
constraint. Then, the maximum number of policies, n, satisfying the survival
constraint is.Whether the company will view the earthquake risk as insurable
depends on whether the fixed cost of marketing and issuing policies is
sufficiently low to make a positive expected profit. This, in turn, depends on
how large the value of n is for any given premium, z. Note that the company
also has some freedom to change its premium. A larger z will increase the
values of n but will lower the demand for coverage. The insurer will decide
not to offer earthquake coverage if it believes it cannot attract enough demand
at any premium structure to make a positive expected profit. The company
will use the survival constraint to determine the maximum number of policies
it is willing to offer.
The EP curve is a useful tool for insurers to utilize in order to
examine the conditions for meeting their survival constraint. Suppose that an insurer wants to determine whether its current portfolio of properties in Long
Beach is meeting the survival constraint for the earthquake hazard. Based on
its current surplus and total earthquake premiums, the insurer is declared
insolvent if it suffers a loss greater than $ 15 million. The insurer can construct
an EP curve such as Figure 2.4 and examine the probability that losses exceed
certain amounts. From this figure, the probability of insolvency is 1.0%. If
the acceptable risk level, then the insurer can either decrease the
amount of coverage, raise the premium and/or transfer some of the risk to
others.
2.6 Framework to Integrate Risk Assessment with Risk
Management
Figure 2.9 depicts a framework for integrating risk assessment with
risk management and serves as a guide to the concepts and analyses presented
in this book. The risk is first assessed through catastrophe modeling.
Catastrophe modeling combines the four components (hazard, inventory,
vulnerability, and loss) to aid insurers in making their decisions on what type
of protection they can offer against a particular risk.
The key link between assessing risk via catastrophe models and
implementing risk management strategies is the stakeholders’ decision
processes. The types of information stakeholders collect and the nature of
their decision processes are essential in developing risk management
strategies. With respect to insurers, catastrophe models are the primary
sources of information on the risk. Their decision rule for developing risk
management strategies is to maximize expected profits subject to meeting the
survival constraint. Property owners in hazard prone areas utilize simplified
decision rules in determining whether or not to adopt mitigation measures to
reduce future losses to their property and/or to purchase insurance.
For purposes of this book, risk management strategies are broadly
classified as either risk reduction measures, such as mitigation, or risk transfer
measures, such as reinsurance. For example, strategies for residential property
owners often involve a combination of measures, including mitigation,
insurance, well-enforced building codes, and land-use regulations. In California
and Florida, all these initiatives exist in some form. Strategies for insurers could
involve charging higher rates to reflect the uncertainty of the risk, changing their
portfolio so they can spread the risk across many areas, or reassigning the risk
using risk transfer instruments such as reinsurance and/or catastrophe bonds.Summary and Relationship to Parts II-IV
This chapter examined the history of catastrophe modeling and the
role catastrophe models play in making a risk insurable. Part II provides a
more detailed discussion of catastrophe modeling for earthquakes and
hurricanes. The output from catastrophe models provides important
information for insurers to manage their risk. By modeling the risk, insurers
can more accurately estimate the premiums to charge for insurance coverage
from natural disasters. In addition, insurers and reinsurers are able to tailor
their coverage to reduce the chances of insolvency. They can develop new
strategies for managing their portfolios so as to avoid losses that might
otherwise cause an unacceptable reduction in surplus. These strategies are
discussed in Part III of the book.
The impact of insurers’ risk management strategies on profitability
and probability of insolvency are explored further in Part IV of the book.
Exceedance probability curves are constructed using real market data for
insurers in Oakland, California, Long Beach, California and Miami/Dade
County, Florida and alternative strategies are examined, including requiring
mitigation to homes in these disaster-prone areas and using risk transfer
instruments to satisfy an insurer’s survival constraint. The book concludes
with a chapter on the future role of catastrophe models in dealing with the
risks associated with terrorism as an extreme event.

PRINCIPLES FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
Strategies for coping with large-scale catastrophes should be anchored in an integrated
framework of risk assessment, risk perception, risk management and disaster response[1]
.
A. Risk Assessment
1. Creating a culture of risk assessment: Governments should undertake a public national
disaster risk and vulnerability assessment that should be re-evaluated every 5 years. Mapped
hazard data should be made publicly available and regularly updated where hazard levels are
altered (e.g., due to climate change) or where there is improved science.
Commentary
The prime tasks in assessing risk are to measure the likelihood of possible disasters, the
distribution of their consequences across different stakeholders and the uncertainties
surrounding these estimates. For each type of risk and level of severity, governments should
be able to quantify the costs it would have to bear under current programs as well as
proposed strategies should one or more of these disasters occur tomorrow (e.g., costs of
protecting critical infrastructure and public assets, expected financial relief to victims of the
disasters - people, communities and businesses - and macroeconomic consequences).
2. Quantifying primary and secondary effects: Risk assessment should not be limited to the
direct and immediate potential effects of a catastrophe (destroyed and damaged assets and
affected victims) but also integrate secondary and indirect social and economic effects through
geographical interdependencies and over time.
Commentary
Given the growing interconnectedness of activities, a catastrophe that occurs in one area can
have ripple effects on other regions and global markets. Some of these effects can also be
enduring so the total effect may greatly exceed the immediate physical loss.
3. Developing national data collection and sharing: National data collection on relevant hazards
and vulnerabilities should be undertaken as a basis for a sound foundation for risk assessment.
In countries where insurance is well-developed, governments should also facilitate a national
data collection effort to measure insurance penetration and exposure at the firm and individual
level, as well as to track insurance losses resulting from catastrophic events systematically.
Commentary
National data collection on insurance exposure provides a nation’s decision-makers with
better knowledge of the level of financial protection in place for recovery and restoration
activities.4. Promoting regional and international co-operation in the collection and sharing of data on
large-scale disasters as well as in catastrophe risk modelling: Governments and relevant public
and private institutions in Members and non-Members would benefit from the promotion of
regional and international co-operation in the collection and sharing of data on exposures to
large-scale disasters as well as in the modeling of the nature of these risks and the uncertainties
surrounding them. The OECD can be instrumental in this respect.
5. Harmonising and upgrading the collection of information on catastrophe risk: Governments
should encourage a greater level of detail, relevance and reliability in the parametric data
collected and made available by national meteorological, seismological, and hydrological
agencies on catastrophe events. Moreover, the development of harmonised taxonomies and
categories should facilitate access to and comparison of information, data and statistics on
catastrophe losses and possibly also on catastrophic risk exposures on a global scale.
Commentary
The development of global, open source disaster risk assessment models promoted by the
OECD through the Global Earthquake Model (GEM) initiative constitutes an important first
step in this direction; other natural perils should be considered as well. Natural hazard maps
should also be integrated, stored and managed in a transparent and consistent way: mapped
hazard information should be made publicly available and it should be used for long term
planning and infrastructure decision-making.
B. Risk Perception
1. Recognising the behavioural biases of individuals and groups: Risk perception and
management strategies should address behavioural biases and heuristics (rules of thumb) of
decision makers, groups and the general public.
Commentary
It is often not the risk estimate, but how one processes that estimate, that will lead to specific
actions (of lack thereof). Failure to recognise this element is likely to jeopardize any national
risk management strategy. This implies incorporating into disaster risk management
strategies the most advanced results of research in cognitive and behavioural sciences.
Understanding individual decision processes (including underestimation of disaster
probability and tendencies toward myopia) as well as social interactions and short-term
goals/priorities is of critical importance in this respect.
2. Increasing risk awareness and improving the quality of disaster risk reduction education
efforts: Human-induced factors greatly contribute to direct and indirect costs of disasters.
Changes in patterns of human behaviour, perception and decision-making at all levels of
government and society which can lead to a substantial reduction in disaster risk should be
promoted.
Commentary
The OECD Policy Handbook on Natural Hazard Awareness and Disaster Risk Reduction
Education provides clear guidance for the development of sound strategies in this field and
constitutes a useful benchmark to assess the situation in a given country or region and
identify possible improvements.C. Risk Management
1. Promoting cost-effective prevention, adaptation and mitigation measures: Efficient risk
prevention, adaptation and mitigation where the expected long-term discounted benefits in
reduced losses exceed the costs must be promoted as a fundamental building block of disaster
management strategies.
Commentary
To achieve efficient prevention, adaptation and mitigation requires well-designed risk
assessments (i.e., the use of good data and catastrophe modeling) to understand how
expected losses will be reduced. The role of incentive systems including the use of insurance
(e.g., premium reductions for policyholders / tax incentives for the formation of catastrophe
risk reserves for insurance companies), in addition to the use of building codes (e.g.
incentives to build disaster resilient houses and buildings) and land use regulation, zoning
and planning to encourage mitigation should be examined.
2. Developing relief and recovery strategies: Relief and recovery strategies should be developed
as a prerequisite for determining ways to provide emergency rescue and to finance immediate
recovery should a disaster occur.
Commentary
These recovery strategies need to be linked to alternative mitigation measures to better
understand the relationship between actions taken before a disaster (ex ante measures) and
those required after a catastrophe occurs (ex post actions).
3. Equity and affordability: Mitigation measures and financial protection tools should be within
the means and abilities of individuals and companies to undertake or pay them, subject to the
below.
Commentary
If the price of insurance truly reflects risk (in compliance with paragraph 2. in part II), one
might need to consider providing financial assistance to individuals in hazard-prone areas
needing special treatment (e.g., low-income residents and businesses). Financial support
should come from general public funding and not through artificially low insurance
premiums which do not provide the right signal of exposure to the people since they can
perceive low-priced insurance as an indicator that the risk they face is low. To this end,
governments could provide insurance vouchers that can be used only to purchase insurance.
Grants or low interest loans from the public sector could also be provided to these individuals
and businesses to encourage them to invest in cost-effective mitigation measures that would
reduce vulnerability and, as a consequence, the cost of financial protection. In developing
countries, this effort might require financial support from the international community. This
principle is not intended as a proposal for a vast shift in resources toward low income
residents or poor countries. If such entities do not engage in appropriate mitigation measures,
or purchase adequate insurance, relief efforts following a disaster will cost donor sources
considerable amounts. The transfers contemplated should be measured against those
amounts. Financial management of catastrophic risk:
• Governments should give careful consideration to politically realistic ex ante financial
arrangements aimed at allocating resources efficiently, given equity concerns. Economic
analyses should be undertaken to determine the respective financial responsibilities of all
stakeholders under different catastrophe scenarios;
• Private/public partnerships and a layered approach involving citizens, the insurance
industry, financial markets and where relevant governments should be considered as an
option;
• Possible ex ante pooling arrangements to ensure adequate financial capacity to cover peak
risks should also be examined, as well as the potential value for governments of capital
market solutions in catastrophic risk transfer, such as risk securitisation, taking into
consideration all the potential advantages and disadvantages.
Commentary
The design of a disaster management strategy needs to consider how losses after a disaster
will be allocated among victims (people and firms), and private sector businesses that insure
against risk (e.g., financial institutions, insurers, reinsurers and businesses themselves
through reserves), and all levels of government (local, state, federal; i.e., present and future
generations of taxpayers).
5. Equal treatment: In developing a disaster management strategy, all citizens of a given country
should be treated equally regardless of sex, race, ethnicity and class.
D. Disaster Response
1. Pre-positioning of post-disaster capabilities and responsibilities: If the responses to disasters
are to be effective, there must be pre-positioning and pre-testing of post-disaster capabilities and
responsibilities before the catastrophe occurs.
Commentary
As the development and deployment of these capabilities is costly and will affect ultimate
outcomes in the event of a disaster, the design of response capabilities must be subject to
the same dictates of efficiency, equity and behavioural realism as noted above.
The development of ex ante measures to mitigate and foresee efficient coverage of the
financial consequences of disasters will need to take account of two potential challenges
and obstacles:
• Government relief, while often necessary, may somewhat deter in the long run ex ante
action by potential victims of future catastrophic risks: if one knows in advance that the
government (or international donors) will provide ample financial assistance after
hardship to those who were not protected, there will be less of an economic incentive for
those in hazard-prone areas either to engage in loss reduction measures prior to a
disaster and/or to purchase adequate insurance coverage (when available). Governments
initiatives should thus be designed to avoid as much as possible crowding out of
individual initiatives and/or moral hazard;
• It is politically more difficult to induce or require people to take potentially costly
protective measures ex ante than to provide financial assistance following a disaster.
Nevertheless, elected officials at the local, federal or state level should take a long-term view and promote the adoption of appropriate protective measures before a catastrophe
occurs.
Risk financing and risk transfer tools, such as insurance, can play a fundamental role in
reducing the negative economic impacts of catastrophic risks. It is, therefore, very
important to fully recognise the policy implications of their use in the context of national or
regional disaster risk management strategies.
II. PRINCIPLES FOR THE USE OF INSURANCE AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AS
POLICY TOOLS
1. Financial protection tools, such as insurance, should be made available, either privately or
publicly, to enable all economic actors to plan ahead before a catastrophe occurs. Private
insurance regulation should allow the development of adequate insurance market capacity.
Commentary
All households and businesses at risk should be strongly encouraged, through economic
incentives, or, as necessary, legally required to carry financial protection at some appropriate
level: compulsion of catastrophic risk insurance may allow to develop more comprehensive
insurance coverage and build national insurance capacity. Micro-insurance schemes can be
developed to assist affected individuals and businesses in low-income countries. Where the
national strategy calls for reliance on such insurance for covering catastrophic losses, those
who fail to purchase insurance should not be provided with ex post compensation by the
government. This policy should be made explicit publicly ex ante (prior to the disaster) and
adhered to ex post (following a disaster).
2. Insurance premiums should be based on risk.
Commentary
Risk-based insurance provides signals to individuals and firms as to the hazards they face,
thereby encouraging them to engage in cost-effective mitigation measures that can reduce
their vulnerability. In light of equity and affordability concerns, governments could provide
financial assistance to purchase insurance and/or to adopt prevention and mitigation
measures, rather than requiring insurers to set premiums artificially low.
3. Government should consider using the existing insurance infrastructure for premium
collection, loss adjusting, claims payment and distribution of insurance products, even if these
products are backed by public money.
Commentary
There are great advantages to having an operational private insurance industry: first, the
insurance market may be able to absorb some catastrophe risk that would otherwise fall on
the government; second, even if there is no sufficient financial capacity in the market to
provide meaningful protection, the administrative resources of the private insurance industry
can provide a platform for establishing a government funded and directed program. In this
respect, insurance companies can perform key services such as marketing of the policies,
premium collection, loss adjusting and claims payment.POSSIBLE INNOVATIONS TO BE DEVELOPED BY MEMBERS UNDER OECD LEADERSHIP
1. A specific structure within the OECD should be developed that could act as an international
information-sharing platform providing data publicly available on large-scale catastrophes.
Commentary
Obtaining relevant information and data under a harmonised framework, assessing risk and
understanding risk perceptions of the relevant stakeholders are key ingredients for the
development and evaluation of risk management strategies. Such an initiative could be
undertaken in conjunction with other organisations in the public and private sectors that
already collect relevant data.
2. The OECD should support comparative studies to understand relevant constraints and
institutional arrangements in developed and developing countries that are likely to affect the
availability of catastrophe coverage and the roles of government and the private sector in
catastrophe risk management (e.g., nature and potential development of insurance markets,
availability of mortgages, defining the respective roles of local and national governments).
Commentary
In this regard, based on the stocktaking and comparative review already performed by the
OECD during the past years, it will be important to examine alternative strategies practised by
different countries for dealing with specific risks with a view to understanding their
relationship (either explicit or implicit) to a set of underlying guidelines and principles such
as those noted above. This exercise could be undertaken for a series of specific risks.
3. The OECD should consider developing a comparative survey instrument to be administered
regularly in OECD countries to better understand risk perception and the way specific policies
are viewed by key stakeholders (the general public, private and public sector organisations).
4. Case studies and examples should be developed to showcase innovations in catastrophe risk
assessment, management and financing in OECD Member countries[2].
Commentary
Given the growing interdependencies between countries and industries due to globalisation
of social and economic activities, top decision makers of non-OECD countries should be able
to turn more systematically toward the OECD for advice on their disaster management issues
and the development of new strategies. It is also in the interest of developed countries to
assure that the citizenry and businesses of low and middle income countries are less
vulnerable to future disasters. Losses in these countries could indeed have ripple effects on
global supply chains, markets and international security worldwide as well as make demands
on relief and multinational lending organisations more pressing. 
A policyholder is a person or a corporation who owns an insurance policy. 

An individual can own a life insurance policy on him/herself, or another individual, such as as a spouse, child, parent, grandchild, etc. 

A company, or corporation, can own a life insurance policy on a "key employee". 

Also, a policy holder is one who has any type of insurance, such as auto, home, renter's, disability income, etc. 

A business is a policyholder by having a business owner's policy, general liability policy, or any type of insurance. 

These are all policyholders.Entity that owns an insurance policy and has the right to exercise all privileges under the contract of insurance, except where restricted by the rights of an assignee (see assignment). A policyholder may or may not be the insured, or the sole or one of the beneficiaries of the policy. Also called policyowner.
for property casualty insurance, the policy holder is responsible for all premium payments, notice of claim, and gets all refunds of premium. 

The insured could also have coverage. Examples of insureds who are NOT policy holders, could include a spouse (automatically insured under personal lines policies, even if they aren't listed), or a listed "additional interest". Who exactly is insured, is DEFINED, in the definitions section of your policy.
The policyholder is the one who is the named owner of the policy. The insured is the one whose life the policy is written on. 

The policyholder and the insured could be one in the same, or they could be two separate individuals. It could also be an employer as the policyholder, and the employee as the insured. 

It could be a husband who owns the policy on the wife, or a parent who owns the policy on a child. 

The person who purchases a policy on him or herself is the insured/policyholder or owner, or one in the same. 
What is the Difference Between the Insured, Owner and Beneficiary of a Life Insurance Policy??
Posted on November 28, 2011 by admin
All life insurance policies have three primary parties that are required as part of the application process: the insured, the policy owner and the beneficiary(s). Each of these are defined below with examples of the common designations.

The Insured

In any life insurance policy, the insured is the person on whom the protection is purchased. In other words, the insured is the covered individual in the life insurance contract.  The life insurance policy rates are based upon the insured’s age, health and lifestyles factors at the time of application. At the insured’s death, the policy proceeds are paid to the named beneficiary.

The insured can also be the applicant or policy owner. In fact, in most cases the insured does own the policy as well.

The Policy Owner

Every life insurance policy also has an owner, sometimes called the Applicant or Policyholder, of the contract. The owner is the person or entity that actually applies for the life insurance policy and retains certain rights and responsibilities.

One responsibility of the policyholder is paying premiums and assuring the policy doesn’t lapse. Additionally, the policy owner has the right to change the mode of premium payment, i.e. annual, semi-annual, quarterly or monthly bank draft as well as the payout method, i.s. lump sum, lifetime annuity or period certain annuity.

In cash value policies, only the owner of the contract is the only person that can take withdrawals or loans against the policy. In fact, with any life insurance policy, the policy owner is the only person or entity that has access to policy information from the customer service department at the insurance company.

Finally, and most importantly, the Applicant or policy owner has sole rights to change the policy beneficiary.

The Beneficiary

The policy beneficiary or beneficiaries can be a person or entity and is designated to receive the policy proceeds or death benefits at the insured’s death. The beneficiaries are usually listed in a specific order: Primary, Secondary and Tertiary. There can be multiple  beneficiaries at each of these levels.

The most common beneficiary example is:

Primary Beneficiary: Spouse, 100%

Secondary Beneficiary: Children Equally

In this case, when the insured dies, His/Her Spouse will receive 100% of the policy proceeds. In the event the spouse predeceases the insured, the Children will share the policy death benefits equally.

As mentioned, entities can also be named beneficiary of a life insurance policy. Such is the case with business owned policies.

An example would be key employee insurance. In many cases, a corporation or other business entity purchases a policy on one of its key people to protect against his/her premature death and the consequences to the company’s revenues. In these case, the company is the policy owner and beneficiary and the insured is the key employee.

In the event of the death of the key person, the company receives the policy proceeds and can use the funds at their discretion.

Another common situation with an entity owning and being the beneficiary of a life insurance policy is for purposes of Estate Planning.  With estate planning, the general goal is to removed assets from the taxable estate and at the same time have the tax free death benefits of a life insurance policy pay eventual estate taxes.

When using life insurance as an estate tax planning tool, an irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT) is established to own the life insurance policy and be the policy beneficiary. The ILIT is set up by an attorney and has its own tax identification number essentially making the trust a separate entity. If set up properly, this removes any ownership from the insured (who is doing the estate planning). Finally, the trust names trustees which are responsible for the administration of the trust and trust proceeds.

At the insureds death, policy proceeds are paid tax free to the irrevocable life insurance trust. The trustee(s) can then use these funds to pay the IRS and estate taxes due.

Conclusion

The parties to a life insurance contract are the insured, policy owner or applicant and the beneficiary(s). When taking out any life insurance policy, it is critical for you to recognize the roles and responsibilities of each of these designations. This post is designed to be a brief summary and is not a comprehensive review of the ins and outs of policy ownership or beneficiary designations. For specific questions, contact your insurance professional or call MEG Financial at (877) 583-3955
Life Insurance
Buying life insurance usually means you're taking out a policy on yourself. You would be the policyholder and would be responsible for paying for it. The person who receives the money if you die is the beneficiary. It's also possible the policyholder can also be the beneficiary. This happens if your employer takes out life insurance on you and gets paid off when you die.
Choosing Beneficiaries
Typically, you're free to name anyone you want as your life insurance beneficiary. While you might name a loved one, you could also name a friend or charity. You can even set out rules that allow a different person -- called a contingent beneficiary -- to get the benefit if the primary beneficiary isn't able to collect. You can even change your beneficiaries around If you set up your policy to allow it.
Additional Benefits
Your life insurance might not be the only policy that pays off if you die. Some auto insurance policies have provisions that pay additional benefits if you die in your car. When this happens, you will need to name a beneficiary to receive those payments. The same would apply to homeowner's insurance as well.
Sharing the Wealth
Some policies let you name additional people to receive benefits without technically calling them beneficiaries. For instance, if your car is financed your lender or leasing company will probably want to be named on your policy as an insured party. That way they get paid if the car is totaled. Your employer may also want to be named on your auto policy if you drive your car during working hours. This helps to protect them from liability if you get into an accident.
WHAT’S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ADDITIONAL INSURED AND ADDITIONAL NAMED INSURED?

Posted by John Powter

Find me on: Facebook  LinkedIn Twitter  Google+
Feb 13, 2014 1:39:00 PM

insurance_policy_red_pencilMany times, insurance policies cover the person who purchases the policy as well as other people who that person designates. These people are typically referred to as the "additional insured" or "additional named insured" in the policy documents and understanding the difference between these two terms is important.

DISTINGUISHING THE TERMS

For the most part, additional insured can be distinguished from additional named insured because their names are not included in the insurance contract. In short, additional insured are entitled to coverage, but their entitlement is extended to them by the actual policy holders. By contrast, additional named insured are considered the same as the main policy holders, meaning that they assume similar rights and risks.

It is important to note that these terms can mean a remarkable range of things depending on the exact insurance policies in question, though there are still some commonalities shared among them.

RIGHTS OF ADDITIONAL INSURED

Entities classified as additional insured are entitled to receive compensation in case the coverage laid out in the insurance contract is applicable. In most cases, additional insured receive less coverage than their counterparts, though the exact details can see significant divergence from policy to policy.

RISKS OF ADDITIONAL INSURED

Since their coverage is extended to them, additional insured may find it more difficult to protect their financial interests. Entities classified as additional insured need to exert extra effort to remain informed about their insurance policies so that the policy holders cannot make changes that will catch them by surprise. Furthermore, additional insured that are unwilling to negotiate with policy holders will end up with less coverage than their more outspoken counterparts.

RIGHTS OF ADDITIONAL NAMED INSURED

Additional named insured are considered owners of their insurance policies, meaning that they also command significant influence over the exact details of their coverage. For example, they can exert influence to lessen coverage for entities classified as additional insured, so long as their counterparts agree with them.

RISKS OF ADDITIONAL NAMED INSURED

Since additional named insured are considered owners of their insurance policies, they also assume the burden of their responsibilities. For starters, even though said entities are not the main policy holders, they need to take some measure of responsibility for the administrative aspects of their insurance policies because that is the best method for remaining informed and thus capable of protecting their financial interests. This is particularly important because they can be held responsible if the main policy holders become unable to meet their obligations under the insurance contracts, which can cause serious problems if said entities are caught unaware.

CONCLUSION

To sum up the information presented here, businesses need to be careful about committing to insurance policies. In this, as in other matters, businesses must examine the terms of their insurance policies and follow up on changes so as to protect their interests. Failure to exert such effort can be catastrophic.
What is the difference between policy owner and policy holder in a term life policy?
There is no difference - just two different ways of saying the same thing. However, there can be a difference between the policy owner/holder and the life assured.

The policy owner/holder is the individual or company who applied for the policy and pays the premiums. The life assured is self-evidently the person whose life is insured. If the policyholder and life assured are the same person, i.e. the policy is an "own life" policy, upon their death the guaranteed death benefit, or sum assured as it is known, is paid to the deceased's estate, or into a trust if one has been set up. If the life assured is not the policyholder then the sum assured is paid to the policyholder.

Only individuals or companies who have an "insurable interest" can apply for a policy on someone's life. There are a number of situations that can qualify as an insurable interest but the most common are a company taking out a policy on the life of a director or other employee, partners in a business on the life/lives of their fellow partner/s, and an individual on the life of their spouse.
Legal & General International (Ireland) Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Legal & General Group, one
of the UK’s leading financial services companies. UK investors in the International Portfolio Bond are afforded
comprehensive protection as detailed below.
FINANCIAL SERVICES COMPENSATION SCHEME (FSCS)
The FSCS is a scheme, created under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, intended to provide compensation
for customers where a firm authorised by the Prudential Regulatory Authority and the Financial Conduit Authority in
the UK is no longer able to meet its obligations to customers.
Policyholder protection may be triggered if a firm is unable, or likely to be unable, to meet claims against it, for
example if it has been placed in liquidation or administration.
There are a number of categories for protection including:
1. Long-term insurance (e.g. pension and life assurance) – is 90% of the claim with no upper limit.
2. Investments (e.g. stocks and shares ISA) – is 100% of the first £50,000 per person per firm.
3. Deposits (e.g. money held with a bank or building society) – from 31 December 2010, the deposit compensation
limit is £85,000. Depositors may still receive a share of their savings above this limit, however this would be a
matter for the insolvency practitioner to determine and any recovery would vary according to the circumstances
of the specific failure.*
The Legal & General International Portfolio Bond is categorised as a long-term insurance arrangement and
consequently falls within the protection regime outlined in point 1 above. Although Legal & General International is
based in Ireland its customers resident in the UK when their policy starts are likely to be entitled to benefit from the UK
FSCS scheme rules.
If Legal & General International (Ireland) Limited is unable to meet its obligation to individual policyholders, they may
be entitled to compensation under the UK Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS). This depends on the
type of business and the circumstances of the claim. Currently 90% of the value of the valid claim is covered by the
scheme. Further information may be obtained from the FSCS on their website at www.fscs.org.uk.
Customers not resident in the UK when the policy is set up will not be entitled to compensation under the FSCS.
SEGREGATION OF ASSETS
Legal & General International is a European Union authorised life assurance company and, as such, it is required to
segregate policyholder assets from those of shareholders. In this way the shareholder cannot use the policyholder’s
assets to support its financial position. The company’s Appointed Actuary is charged with ensuring that policyholder’s
interests are taken into account as part of the company’s business process. The Appointed Actuary reports to the
Central Bank of Ireland in this regard on an annual basis although the Appointed Actuary is required to ensure that
at all times the policyholder’s interests are represented in the company’s decision making process.
PROTECTION IN RESPECT OF UNDERLYING ASSETS WITHIN LEGAL & GENERAL
INTERNATIONAL’S PORTFOLIO BOND
The protection afforded in respect of underlying assets is addressed under the headings of deposits, Internal Funds and
External Funds.
INVESTMENT IN LEGAL & GENERAL INTERNATIONAL’S INTERNAL FUNDS
Individual policyholders, investing in Legal & General International’s internal life funds would have a claim under the FSCS if
Legal & General International were to be in default.
This protection does not extend to the underlying assets or deposits, should any of those fund managers or deposit account
providers default, these are covered below. The internal funds are, however, pooled arrangements where investments and
deposits are spread over a large number of assets and counterparties, significantly reducing any institutional risk.
INVESTMENT IN EXTERNAL FUNDS
Legal & General International’s rights to recover losses following a failure by an external investment manager to meet their
obligations may not be as extensive as those of individuals investing directly in the relevant asset.
Policyholders would not themselves be able to claim under the FSCS against an external fund manager in default.
In practice, whether or not the investment is through a bond, the assets of the external fund may be held separately from the
external fund manager’s own assets with an independent third-party custodian and should not be threatened by the external
fund manager’s default.
INVESTMENTS WITH DISCRETIONARY FUND MANAGERS (DFM)
Should a DFM become unable to meet its liabilities, it is unlikely that Legal & General International would be able to make a claim
under the FSCS. In the event that assets were held with a DFM and Legal & General International became unable to meet its
liabilities, those policyholders who were UK resident at the time of taking out the policy are likely to have recourse to the FSCS,
as highlighted under the “Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS)” section above.
CONCLUSION
Legal & General International is rated as ‘very strong’** by AKG Actuaries & Consultants Ltd. This is the highest rating given
by AKG to any offshore long-term insurer; shared with a number of other UK financial services companies. It is important to
understand, however, that the performance of the assets in which a policyholder chooses to invest are not Legal & General
International’s responsibility. They do not have the right to claim compensation against Legal & General International in
relation to the poor performance of any asset. Also, they do not have the right to claim compensation against Legal & General
International in relation to the default of any external investment managers or deposit account providers.
Introduction

Policyholder protection schemes are designed to act as a safety net for policyholders should the insurer with whom they are invested become insolvent.

The UK introduced the Policyholder Protection Act 1975 (PPA) which allows the Policyholder Protection Board (PPB) to act as an industry funded safety net should an insurer become insolvent.

The Isle of Man Government introduced The Manx Life Companies Voluntary Policyholders Protection Act on the 5th of April 1988 which provided Policyholder Protection for all policies issued after 5th April 1988; this was subsequently followed by the Life Assurance (Compensation of Policyholder’s) Regulations Act 1991.

Some 10 years later in 2002, Guernsey introduced the Insurance Business (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law which required their insurer’s to have arrangements in place with the Guernsey Financial Services Commission (GSFC) in order to protect the interests of long-term investors. Unlike the UK and the Isle of Man, Guernsey did not opt for a state run scheme placing the responsibility onto the insurers themselves.

Who do these schemes actually cover?

Whilst schemes differ from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, they are generally a way for the policyholder to recover some value should the insurer with whom they are invested become insolvent. Until that happens, the scheme is dormant.

The UK’s protection scheme is restricted to UK residents who hold assets in the UK or who were sold a financial product whilst UK resident, whereas the Isle of Man scheme protects policyholder’s wherever they reside in the world providing they hold assets with an Isle of Man based insurer.

Guernsey schemes may not be as clear cut therefore, anyone looking to invest with a Guernsey Insurer should check with the company concerned to ascertain who, what and where is covered.

The Insurer’s responsibility

A UK insurer must maintain records where necessary to identify the assets allocated to its long-term business fund and whilst the FCA will ordinarily not intervene or place specific requirements on the insurer; they will however review solvency on case by case basis based upon the aim of maintaining market confidence.

Insurers based in the Isle of Man are required to maintain an account for the assets attributable to the long-term business fund and whilst it can be practical for the insurer to appoint a 3rd party to undertake this role for operational purposes, there is no regulatory requirement to do so.

Guernsey insurers are required to appoint a GSFC authorised Trustee, which in turn may appoint a custodian who are responsible for safeguarding the company’s assets. They are not responsible for the management of the policyholder’s funds. Insurers are required to maintain a minimum level of solvency which is monitored regularly whereas the Trustees are required to report to the GSFC if 5% or more of the Trust asset value is paid out within one calendar month. They must also provide a certificate of assets held & the assets movement on a quarterly basis.

The outcome of insolvency

For long term investments in the UK, the PPB may look to transfer the ongoing policies of an insolvent insurer to another company otherwise the PPB must pay 90% of the fund value of the policy for the purpose of liquidation; however assets may not be transferred out of an insurer’s long-term fund unless they represent an established surplus.

In the Isle of Man, the Scheme is simply required to pay policy owners an amount equal to 90% of the surrender value (subject to the provisions of the scheme) with no upper limit in place.

As no government compensation scheme exists in Guernsey, an insurer is required to hold 90% of Trust liabilities with the appointed Trustee/custodian to ensure a legal separation between the policyholder’s assets and the insurer’s shareholder assets/ creditors. Many Insurers in Guernsey have been known to increase this hold up to 100%. The flexibility of the Trust arrangement is suitable for products where the surrender value is linked to the performance of the underlying investment.

What isn’t covered by compensation schemes?

In the UK the following types of policyholders are excluded from any form of compensation, this includes the directors, managers, corporate bodies, persons holding more than 5% of the capital, auditors, actuaries and any other persons who have contributed to the firm’s insolvency.

Like the UK, Isle of Man regulations state no compensation will be paid to persons who are controllers of the insolvent insurer. It should be noted that a policyholder’s claim may be reduced or rejected if submitted more than 6 months after knowing the insurers insolvency, 18 months after insolvency and/or if the claimant is protected under any comparable scheme.

And finally...

Policyholder protection schemes do not cover losses incurred through poor investment performance. They are only of relevance should the insurer become insolvent.

For long-term investors, it is essential to have a scheme in place that protects their assets in the worst case scenario. Where investors are considering Guernsey Insurance companies over IOM Insurers; and where policyholder protection scheme are a concern; the questions would have to be whether a government backed scheme is more robust than one provided by an industry?

Important notes

Please note that the information provided is for general information purposes only and should not be relied on as advice. Whilst we have ensured this information is correct from our understanding of the schemes as at 28 October 2013, it is also subject to change. This document is for financial advisers only and not to be distributed to retail clients.

DEFINITION OF 'POLICYHOLDER SURPLUS'
The assets of a policyholder-owned insurance company (also called a mutual insurance company) minus its liabilities. Policyholder surplus is one indicator of an insurance company’s financial health. It gives an insurance company another source of funds, in addition to its reserves and reinsurance, if it needs to pay a higher than expected amount of claims. When an insurance company is publicly owned, its assets minus its liabilities are instead called shareholders’ equity.
The basics of insurance dividends
Receiving money from your insurance company often means that something bad has happened to you. But some insurers do pay you under good circumstances. These payments are known as dividends.
 
Policy dividends are a "return of premium," which means that if your insurer had an overall good year, it will give you back part of the premium you paid for your insurance policy.
 
But not all insurance companies pay dividends, nor do all insurance policies. Here's a look at how you can find out whether you can expect a dividend check from your insurance policy, and how much you might get.
Your money back — but not guaranteed
Which dividend is which?
 
The word "dividend" is often thrown around so loosely that its meaning gets confusing. Thus it is important to note the difference between a policy dividend and a stock dividend.
 
A policyholder dividend pays a return of premium back to the policyholder if the company has strong financial results and a lower-than-expected number of claims. These are paid by mutual insurance companies, in which ownership lies with policyholders.
 
A stock dividend is declared by a publicly traded stock company. Insurance companies generally issue stock dividends to stockholders to compensate for when the company is not growing at astronomical rates, according to Michael Snowdown, a faculty member at the College for Financial Planning in Denver. "If you don't have a good plan to grow, you have to declare a dividend," he says. "Otherwise, people are going to drop your stock."
 
Thus, in order to receive a stock dividend from an insurance company, you must be a stockholder, but you don't have to be a policyholder. You can be both, but it means buying stock as well as a policy.
Whether or not you receive a dividend on your insurance policy depends on three factors:
Loss experience: An insurance company anticipates how many claims it will have in a given year by examining its claim history. If your insurer pays out fewer claims than expected, you have a better chance of receiving a dividend.
Investment performance: Your insurance company invests the money it saves for reserves and other contract obligations. If the investments perform well, you have a better chance of receiving a dividend.
Expenses: Expenses include everything associated with the cost of selling insurance, from agent commissions to advertising to office expenses. If your insurance company spends less than anticipated, you have a better chance of receiving a dividend.
If the insurance company has an "off year," meaning that its financial performance in those areas is poor, it likely will not pay a dividend. However, it does not need favorable results in all areas to pay a dividend. For example, the insurer still may pay a dividend if its expenses were higher than anticipated but its investments posted record results. Snowdown says insurers also take revenues into account, but revenue is a lesser factor because it is not as easy to predict as expenses, investment returns, or loss experience.
Insurers pay dividends not only to pass on savings to policyholders, but also to get a substantial tax break. Karen Horvath, vice president at A.M. Best, an insurance ratings company based in Oldwick, N.J., says that dividends are subtracted from a company's income, thus lowering the amount of taxes it must pay.
Which dividend is which?
 
The word "dividend" is often thrown around so loosely that its meaning gets confusing. Thus it is important to note the difference between a policy dividend and a stock dividend.
 
A policyholder dividend pays a return of premium back to the policyholder if the company has strong financial results and a lower-than-expected number of claims. These are paid by mutual insurance companies, in which ownership lies with policyholders.
 
A stock dividend is declared by a publicly traded stock company. Insurance companies generally issue stock dividends to stockholders to compensate for when the company is not growing at astronomical rates, according to Michael Snowdown, a faculty member at the College for Financial Planning in Denver. "If you don't have a good plan to grow, you have to declare a dividend," he says. "Otherwise, people are going to drop your stock."
 
Thus, in order to receive a stock dividend from an insurance company, you must be a stockholder, but you don't have to be a policyholder. You can be both, but it means buying stock as well as a policy.
policyholder surplus
The difference between an insurer's admitted assets and liabilities—that is, its net worth. This figure is used in determining the insurer's financial strength and capacity to write new business.

A Short Course in Non-Life Insurance
(Philippine Setting)
Part 1: Introduction
1. DEFINITION OF INSURANCE
We define Insurance as “ a contract whereby one undertakes for a
consideration to indemnify another against loss, damage or liability
arising from an unknown or contingent event”. It is a social device
wherein the losses of a few are distributed among the many which
otherwise would be borne by the few. It is a scheme whereby one
substitutes a small definite loss for a large but uncertain loss under an
arrangement in which the fortunate many who escape loss will
compensate the unfortunate few.

2. NATURE OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
An insurance contract is an agreement under which one party is obligated
to make good the loss suffered by a second party through the occurrence
of a designated event. The event must be a fortuitous one or beyond the
control of either party.
A contract of insurance is an agreement, whereby one party on the one
hand called the Insurer undertakes for a consideration called the
premium to indemnify, one or more parties called the Insured against
loss, damage or liability arising from an unknown or contingent event.
3. ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Competent Parties – there must be a legal capacity to give
consent or to enter into contract.
b) Subject Matter – the subject or object must be within the
commerce of man and it must be lawful.
c) Offer and Acceptance – there must be meeting of the minds
between the two parties.
d) Consideration – there must be a payment of a premium to the
Insurer for the assumption of the risk.
e) Insurable Interest – there must be an economic loss to the
Insured at the happening of the contingency insured against.
4. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING INSURANCE CONTRACT
a) Good Faith – the doctrine of uberrimae fidei (utmost good faith)
meaning that any concealment or misrepresentation of a material fact
by the insured will invalidate the policy. 
b) Insurable Interest – is meant that interest which exists when the
insured will suffer a disadvantage if the contingency insured against
happens and will enjoy a benefit if the contingency insured against
fails to happen.
c) Indemnify – to make good a loss. This means to place the insured
in the same situation in which he was before the loss.
d) Subrogation – the right of an insurer to be substituted to any right
of action which the insured may have against a third person whose
negligence or wrongful act caused the loss or injury.
e) Contribution – means that if there is more than one policy in force
covering the same interest in the same subject matter against the
same peril, the insured shall not be entitled to recover more than full
amount of the loss.
f) Proximate Cause – that which in a natural and continuous
sequence, unbroken by any new independent cause, produces that
event and without which, that event would not have occurred.
5. MAJOR CLASSES OF GENERAL INSURANCE
a) Fire
b) Marine
aa. Marine Cargo
bb. Marine Hull
c) Motor Car
aa. Private Car
bb. Commercial Vehicle
cc. Land Transportation Operator
dd. Motorcycle
ee. Motor Trade
d) Personal Accident
e) Aviation
aa. Hull
bb. Liabilities
f) Engineering Insurance
aa. Contractors All Risks
bb. Erection All Risks
cc. Machinery Breakdown
g) Miscellaneous Casualty Lines
aa. Comprehensive General Liability 
bb. Scheduled Property Floater
h) Bonds
aa. Surety
bb. Fidelity
6. FORMS
a) Proposal – an application for cover or for a premium to be quoted.
It gives the Insurer full details of the risk against which insurance
protection is to be provided.
b) Cover Note – a document by which temporary cover is granted by
the Insurer to the Assured pending issuance of regular policy.
c) Policy – not the contract itself but evidence of the contract.
Main Sections

aa. Basic Data/Schedule
i Policy Number
ii Name of Insured
iii Amount Insured
iv Period of Insurance
v Insurance Rate
vi Amount of Premium
bb. Recital Clause or Preamble – spells out the parties to the contract, the
proposal as basis of the contract, the premium.
cc. Operative Clause – sets out the circumstances under which the
insurers are liable to the insured
dd. Exclusions Clause – enumerates the excepted risks in the coverage
ee. Conditions – sets out the rules which govern the application and
interpretation of the contract as a whole
ff. Attestation Clause – confirms that the insurers have authenticated the
contract by signature.
d) Endorsement – policy alterations refer to changes made after the
issuance of policies or at the time of issuance for the purpose of altering,
limiting, extending or clarifying any of the policy terms or conditions.
The usual method of effecting policy alterations is by way of
endorsements. An endorsement is defined as a written form of
agreement between the Insured and the Insurer entered into for the
purpose of modifying, limiting, extending, altering, correcting or clarifying 
policy terms, conditions or wordings or to incorporate additional or new
agreements.
7. RISK - it is possibility of loss or injury
8. PERILS - are the causes of loss. Their existence creates risks.
Fire, theft, death and sickness are perils.
9. HAZARDS
Hazards are the conditions of a risk that may create or increase the
chance of loss. The kinds of hazards are physical, moral and morale
hazards.
 10. PARTIES TO AN INSURANCE CONTRACT

 a) Insurer – any person, partnership, association or corporation duly
 authorized to transact business.
 b) Insured – anyone except a public enemy may be insured. 
Part 2: FIRE INSURANCE
1. DEFINITION
Fire Insurance is a contract whereby one (the insurer) promises, for a
consideration (the premium) to indemnify another, (the Assured) for direct loss
or damage of the latter’s property by fire or lightning.
2. POLICY TERM
Refers to the period of insurance, that is, the time limit within which a policy will
remain in force. Fire policies are usually written for a period of twelve (12)
months or one year and are therefore issued on an annual basis.
3. OPEN POLICY AND VALUED POLICY
The Standard Fire Policy is an open policy which means that in the event of loss,
whether total or partial, it is understood that the amount of loss shall be subject
to appraisal and the liability of the company, if established, shall be limited to the
actual loss, subject to applicable terms, conditions, warranties and clauses of the
policy, and in no case shall exceed the amount of the policy.
In contrast, valued policy is one which expresses on the face an Agreement that
the thing insured shall be valued at a specific sum. In the event of total loss, the
valuation on the policy is deemed to be conclusive between the parties, except
when there is fraud or error on the part of either party.
4. THE SUM INSURED
The sum insured is simply the insurer’s maximum liability and a basis on which
the premium is calculated; it is not an admission of the insurers of the value of
the property nor it is the amount which they should pay in the event of the loss,
unless there is a stipulation to this effect.
5. WHO MAY BE INSURED
a) Absolute or Registered Owner of Property
b) Part Owner or Joint Owner of Property
c) Mortgagor or Mortgagee
d) Lessor or Lessee
e) Bailee – to whom property has been entrusted 
6. WHAT MAY BE INSURED
a) Building (completed or under construction)
b) Contents
aa. Stocks in trade, goods or merchandise
bb. Machinery, equipment, spare parts, accessories and tools.
cc. Business or household appliances, utensils, furniture, fixtures and
fittings.
dd. Personal effects and belongings (money and jewelry excluded).
ee. Other materials, property, such as postage stamps, books, motor
vehicles and others.
7. DESCRIBING INSURED PROPERTY
a) Machinery and Equipment
“ On machineries and equipment of every kind and description …”
However, if certain specific machinery or equipment are to be insured
only, then such must definitely be specified so that the identity of that
particular machinery or equipment insured may be established in the
event of loss.
b) Stocks
“ On stocks in trade …” or “ on general merchandise of every kind and
description …”. It is however, advisable to name some of the stocks or
merchandise covered such as flour, rice, textiles etc.
c) Household Contents
i Household furniture, fixtures and fittings
ii Personal effects and belongings (excluding money and jewelry)
iii Electrical appliances
iv Books and magazines
v Kitchen utensils
vi Betterments and improvements
d) Business or Store Contents
i Stocks in trade
ii Business or store furniture, fixtures and fittings
iii Business machines and electrical appliances
iv Business equipment, betterments and improvements
v Office stationeries and supplies 
e) Office Contents
i Office furniture, fixtures and fittings
ii Office equipment, machines and electrical appliances
iii Office stationeries and supplies
iv Office betterments and improvements
8. LOCATION OF INSURED PROPERTY
The location of an insured property is given in the following sequence:
a) House Number and Name of the Street
b) House Number of the whole building of which the premises to be insured
forms a part
c) District, town, municipality or city
d) Province
e) District and Block Number, if any
9. PERILS COVERED BY FIRE INSURANCE POLICY
The following perils are covered in a Standard Fire Policy:
a) Fire (subject to certain exclusions)
b) Lightning, whether fire ensues or not
The following forms of damage are likewise covered:
a) Damage during or immediately following a fire caused by:
aa. Smoke or Scorching
bb. Falling walls and the like
b) Damage caused by fire brigade or other competent authority in the
discharge of their duty
c) Damage to property removed from a burning building in an effort to save
such property.
10. EXCLUSIONS
Some of the exclusions provided for in a fire policy are:
a) Inherent vice, process of decay 
b) War, invasion, act of foreign enemy, hostilities or warlike operations
(whether war be declared or not) civil war, mutiny, civil commotion,
insurrection, rebellion, revolution, military or usurped power.
c) Riot, strike, malicious action, impact by vehicle, forest fire
d) Earthquake, volcanic eruption, flood, inundation, windstorm, tempest,
water damage, removal of debris, consequential loss.
e) Nuclear reaction, nuclear radiation.
11. SPECIAL PERILS INSURANCE (EXTENDED COVER)
Some perils that are excluded as previously mentioned can also be covered by
paying an additional premium and is usually effected by the issuance of an
endorsement to the fire policy.
a) Earthquake
b) Typhoon and Flood
c) Riot and Strike
d) Loss or damage caused directly by impact of land vehicle or falling object.
e) Bursting or overflow of water tanks, apparatus or pipes.
12. PREMIUM PAYMENTS
Our Standard Fire Policy emphatically states that the insurance company does
not assume liability unless the premium is paid. The insurance company will
make good any loss after payment of premium.
13. POLICY CANCELLATIONS
A fire policy may be cancelled at the request of the Insured upon which the
unearned premium must be refunded. No reason need be given by the Insured.
14. RENEWALS
After a policy has been in force for one year, it may be renewed for another year
subject to mutual consent. In other words, both the insured and the insurance
company has the option to decide whether to renew or not. 
15. COVER NOTES
Sometimes applicants need insurance coverage very badly, but necessary details
or date are not available for the issuance of regular policies.
In such case, insurance companies may issue provisional certificates of insurance
coverage known as Cover Notes in which the basic or skeletal information is
listed.
However, cover notes are temporary in nature and must be replaced with regular
policies within sixty (60) days.
16. PROCEDURES OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
Generally speaking, whenever a fire loss occurs, the very first thing for an agent
to do would be to give written notice to the insurance company involved and to
inquire which adjuster or adjustment company the insurer has designated to
handle the claim.
After an adjuster conducted an on-site inspection, normally a claim form will be
given to the insured. There are many questions to be answered. Primarily, the
information would concern policy no., location of risk, property insured, date and
time of fire, origin and cause of fire, extent of loss, other insurances and the
amount of the claim. Claim form is to be subscribed and notarized.
The Insured may be required to submit supporting papers and documents to
prove his claim, such as income tax returns, building plans (in case of building
insurance), invoices, sales records and others.
After the adjusters having evaluated all the facts and circumstances surrounding
the fire, liability has to be admitted or denied in behalf of the insurance
company. If it were admitted, the adjuster would then proceed to negotiate with
the insured to determine the amount of compensation payable and to resolve
matters concerning salvage, if any. This would eventually lead to payment of
the loss.
If it were denied, then an official advice will have to be given of such denial. 
Part 3: MARINE INSURANCE
DEFINITION
Marine Insurance is an insurance against risks connected with navigation in which a
ship, cargo, freightage, profit or other insurable interest in movable property may be
exposed during a certain voyage or a fixed period of time.
1. CLASSES OF MARINE INSURANCE
Marine Insurance is classified according to the subject matter insured, as follows:
a) Cargo Insurance – this refers to insurance on goods or movables.
According to the Rules of Construction of Policy, the term goods means
goods in the nature of merchandise, and does not include personal
effects or provision and stores for use on board.
b) Hull Insurance – this refers to insurance on ship, i.e., hull and
machinery and specially covers loss of or damage to hull or machinery
directly caused by accidents in loading, discharging or shifting cargo or
fuel; explosions on shipboard or elsewhere; breakdown of or accident to
nuclear installations or reaction on shipboard or elsewhere bursting of
boilers, breakage of shafts or any latent defect in the machinery or hull;
contact with an aircraft; negligence of master, officers, crew or pilots
provided such loss or damage has not resulted from want of due
diligence by the assured, owners or managers.
c) Freight Insurance – as the name suggests, this refers to insurance on
freight. The rules for construction of policy defines freight as including
the profit derivable by shipowner from the employment of his ship to
carry his own goods or movables, as well as freight payable by a third
party, but does not include passage money. A freight insurance policy
covers a sum not exceeding 15% of the value of hull and machinery.
Loss of freight is recoverable if directly caused by the perils mentioned
above. In the event of a total loss of the insured vessel, the sum insured
shall be paid in full.
2. SOME OF THE PERILS INSURED AGAINST
The plain form of marine policy enumerates the perils insured against, as
follows: 
a) Fire – hardly needs definition. Damage due to fire, lightning, smoke,
scorching, damage done by water or by chemicals used in extinguishing
fire, are compensable.
b) Collision – loss or damage caused by the impact of vessel with another
or any stationary object (including ice).
c) Stranding – when in consequence of some accidental or unusual
occurrence, she comes in contact with the ground or other obstruction,
and remains hard fast upon it. It may be on the rocks, on piles which
have been driven into the harbour bed, and so forth.
d) Grounding – this is almost similar to stranding. This is a situation where
ship or vessel cannot move as it has struck bottom. Vessel, however, has
not sunk.
e) Sinking – this is a situation where ship or vessel goes underneath the
surface of the water. In respect of sinking, it must generally be of such a
nature that the vessel is completely covered with water. If the vessel
could still be further immersed, there is no sinking.
3. MARINE CARGO INSURANCE
a) Types of Policy
aa. Open Policy – a continuous contract covering automatically all
shipments within certain geographical limits for an indefinite
period of time subject to cancellation by either party.
bb. S. G. Form (Ship-goods) – covers only one shipment or voyage.
b) Particulars of a Marine Cargo Policy
aa. Name and address of assured
bb. Amount of Insurance and Value of Goods
cc. Full description of cargo
dd. Type of packing – no. of crates/packing/boxes
ee. Marks and Numbers
ff. Name of Vessel
gg. Loading/Sailing/Arrival Dates
hh. Ports of Origin and Destination
ii. Consignee, if other than proposer or shipper
jj. Terms and conditions of insurance
kk. Bill of Lading
ll. Negotiating Bank and Letter of Credit
mm. Place of Settlement and/or Payment of Claim 
4. TYPES OF COVERAGES (Old Clauses)
An Insured may choose the type of coverage he wants depending on his
particular needs. The following are the coverages available:
a) Total loss by total loss of vessel only this is the most restricted cover. In
order for a claim to arise, the vessel carrying the cargo has to be a total
loss and the cargo impossible to save except at a cost exceeding the
value of the salvaged cargo.
b) Total Loss Only – interest must have been totally lost by one of the perils
enumerated in the policy.
c) Free from Particular Average (FPA) – loss of a part of a whole shipment
which is not a total loss is not covered (old clauses)
Losses Allowed:
aa. Total and/or constructive total loss
bb. Total loss of any apportionable part or a distinct species, if the
whole shipment is composed of several species.
cc. Total loss of any package in loading, transhipment or discharge.
dd. Direct liability for general average sacrifice
ee. General average contributions
ff. Salvage charges
gg. Particular charges whenever recoverable under a policy covering
particular average.
hh. Sue and labor charges
ii. Particular average irrespective of percentage if the vessel or craft
be stranded, sunk or burnt, and so forth.
d) With Average (WA) – under this, particular average and other loss or
damage are recoverable in all circumstances in which they are admitted
under FPA. All other particular average arising from perils insured against
is payable if it attains the percentage specified in the policy. (old clauses)
e) Against All Risks – all losses that are payable under the WA are covered
as well as losses from the additional coverages such as: (old clause)
aa. Theft, pilferage, and non-delivery
bb. Leakage and breakage
cc. Fresh water damage
dd. Sweat and mold
ee. Hook damage
All risks does not cover faulty manufacture, inherent vice or delay. 
5. BASIC MARINE CARGO COVERS NEW CLAUSES – (For Air and Water
Transport)
A) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “C”
1. Perils Covered
Loss of or damage to the subject-matter insured reasonably
attributable to:
a. Fire or explosion
b. Vessel or craft being stranded grounded sunk or capsized
c. Overturning or derailment of land conveyance
d. Collision or contact of vessel craft or conveyance with any
external object other than water
e. Discharge of cargo at a port of distress
f. General average sacrifice
g. Jettison
2. Duration of Cover
Warehouse at the port of loading up to delivery to warehouse at
port of destination, or upon the lapse of fifteen (15) days counting
from the date the cargo landed at port of discharge, WHICHEVER
SHALL FIRST OCCUR.
3. Clauses and Warranties under Clauses “C”
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “C” 1/1/82
b. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
c. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78
(not applicable for air transport)
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (For overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause. (For inter-island shipment)
4. Goods and merchandise allowed for clauses “C” cover:
a. shipment of powder like cement, wheat, flour, etc.
b. Rice and grains
c. Salt, sugar, tobacco, seeds
d. Copper and copper products
e. Non-flammable chemicals
f. Non-flammable liquids
g. Frozen fish and meat products
h. Vegetable and other food items 
B) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “B”
1. Perils Covered
Loss of or damage to the subject-matter insured reasonably
attributable to:
a. All clauses “C” perils, plus
b. Earthquake, volcanic eruption or lightning
c. Washing overboard
d. Entry of sea lake or river water into vessel craft hold
conveyance container liftvan or place of storage
e. Total loss of any package lost overboard or dropped whilst
loading on to, or unloading from, vessel or craft.
2. Duration of Cover
(Same as CLAUSES “C”)
3. Clauses and Warranties under clauses “B”
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “B” 1/1/82
b. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
c. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78 (not applicable for air
transport)
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (for overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause. (for inter-island shipment)
4. Goods and merchandise allowed for clauses “B”
a. Automobiles and trucks and other motor vehicle
b. Native handicrafts
c. Textiles and clothings
d. Paper/plastic products
C) INSTITUTE CARGO CLAUSES “A” OR ALL RISKS
1. Perils Covered
All types of loss or damage except:
a. Inherent Vice – the natural tendency of some items to
effect a chemical reaction within themselves to as to make
them physically unusable for the intended purposes. e. g.
decay in case of fruits and vegetables, rotting in case of
fresh meat, spontaneous combustion in the case of copra. 
b. Delay – frequently occurring in shipments of chemicals
due to prolonged storage at the piers, the chemicals could
lose their potency.
2. Duration of Cover
(Same as in clauses “B” and “C”)
3. Clauses and Warranties under Clauses “A” or All Risks
a. Institute Cargo Clauses “A” 1/1/82
b. Institute Classification Clause 1/7/78 (not applicable for air
transport)
c. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
d. Fifteen (15) days clause. (for overseas shipment)
e. Seven (7) days clause (for inter-island shipment)
f. Institute Theft, Pilferage and Non-Delivery (Insured Value)
Clause 16/7/28
g. Nuclear Exclusion Clause
4. Goods and Merchandise allowed for ALL RISKS cover as
follows:
a. Steel machineries and spare parts
b. Steel products
D) TOTAL LOSS ONLY
1. Perils Covered
Total loss of the entire cargo due to perils insured against.
2. Duration of Cover
From the time cargo is admitted onboard the vessel until unloaded
therefrom at the port of destination or upon the lapse of seven (7)
days counting from the date cargo landed at port of discharge,
whichever shall first occur. 
3. Clauses and Warranties under TLO
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
b. Typhoon Clause
c. Overloading Warranty
d. Nuclear Exclusions Clause
e. Seven (7) days clause
E) TOTAL LOSS BY TOTAL LOSS OF THE VESSEL ONLY (TL/TLVO)
1. Perils Covered
Total loss of the entire cargo arising from total loss of the vessel.
The proximate cause should be perils of the sea.
2. Scope of Cover
Whilst on board the vessel

3. Clauses and Warranties under TL/TLVO
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
b. Typhoon Clause
c. Overloading Warranty
d. Nuclear Exclusions Clause
F) LAND TRANSPORT
1. Perils Covered – Loss or damage arising from the following:
a. Fire, including self-ignition and internal explosion of the
conveyance.
b. Accidental collision of the vehicle with any other
automobile, vehicle or object excluding, however, contact
with any portion of the road bed, curbing, any stationary
object while backing for loading or unloading or rails or
ties of street and excluding collision of the load with any
object when such collision of the load with any object does
not involve collision of the carrying truck. 
c. Overturning or upset of the motor truck
d. Explosion
e. Collapse or subsidence of bridges
f. Flood (meaning rising of navigable waters), lightning,
cyclone, tornado, landslide, earthquake and volcanic
erruption.
2. Scope of Cover
Whilst in transit on board the truck.
3. Clauses and Warranties under Truck Risks Clause
a. Red Clause “B” 1/11/76
6. LOSSES
a) Total Loss
aa. Actual Total – a material and physical loss of the subject matter
insured.
bb. Constructive Total – commercial loss of the subject matter
insured is reasonably assumed if more than ¾ of the value is
actually lost.
b) Partial Loss
Any other loss not considered total.
c) General Average Loss
Loss due to a general average act – when any extra-ordinary sacrifice or
expenditure is voluntarily and reasonably made or incurred in the time of
peril for the purpose of preserving the property imperilled in the common
adventure 
1. CLAIMS PROCEDURE
In the event of loss or damage, it is the duty of the assured to safeguard his
insured cargo and he is required under his marine cargo policy, as follows:
a) To claim immediately on the carriers, Port Authorities or other Bailee for
any missing package.
b) To apply immediately for survey by carrier’s or other Bailees’
Representative if any loss or damage be apparent and claim on the
Carriers or other Bailees for any actual loss or damage found at such
survey.
c) In no circumstances, except under written protest, to give clean receipts
where goods are in doubtful condition.
d) To give notice in writing to the Carriers or other Bailees within three (3)
days of delivery if the loss or damage was not apparent at the time of
taking delivery.
2. In general, the documents required by a marine insurer to be produced
by the assured for purposes of substantiating a loss under the policy
are the following:
a) Marine Cargo Policy
b) Supplier’s Invoice
c) Supplier’s Packing List
d) Bill of Lading
e) Certificate of Bad Order
f) Certificate of Short-Delivery
g) Certificate of Non-Delivery
h) Certificate of Short-Landing
i) Certificate of Survey
j) Correspondence exchange between the assured and Bailees 
Part 4: MOTOR CAR INSURANCE
Motor Vehicle (Auto) Insurance, defined
- any kind of insurance pertaining to the ownership, maintenance or use of motor
vehicle.
Two (2) Major Divisions of Auto Insurance Coverage
1. Physical or Material Damage Coverage
This is the insurance that protects the insured from loss or damage to the car
itself. Example of covered losses are as follows:
a. Collision or overturning
b. Fire, lightning, self-ignition
c. External explosion
d. Burglary, theft
e. Malicious act, other than by the insured
f. Whilst being transported by road, rail, inland transit, lift or elevator.
2. Casualty Coverage – refers to the liability and personal accident coverage
afforded under the motor car policy; consists of the following sub-groupings:
a. Bodily Injury Liability
b. Property Damage Liability the insured shall become legally obligated to
pay for injury and/or damage to property belonging to others caused by
accident, arising from the use, ownership and maintenance of the insured
vehicle, subject to policy limits.
c. Personal Accident – this covers death or injuries to occupants of the
vehicle resulting from accident whilst boarding, riding or alighting from
the insured vehicle, regardless of liability.
Five (5) Motor Vehicle Policy Forms in Use:
1. Private Car Policy Form - for private use cars
2. Commercial Vehicle Form - for vehicles used for carriage of own goods and
for domestic and social purposes
3. Motor Trade Policy - this is the policy for motor car dealers for vehicles whilst
on display and on demonstration 
4. Motor Cycle Policy - for motorcycles and tricycles
5. Land Transportation Operators Policy - for vehicles used for carriage of
passenger and cargo for hire or reward.
Automotive equipment not belonging under these classifications (e.g. mobile crane,
bulldozer, road grader, road roller, farm tractor, etc.) are insured under Inland Floater
Policy.
BRIEF DISCUSSION OF PRINCIPAL POLICY CONDITIONS
1) Recital Clause
“Whereas the Insured by his corresponding proposal and declaration and which
shall be the basis of this contract and is deemed to be incorporated herein has
applied to the Company for the insurance hereinafter contained, subject to the
payment of the premium as consideration for such insurance.”
Two (2) terms in this Recital Clause must be noted:
a. Proposal Form
It is common practice in the insurance of motor vehicle to insist upon the
completion of a written proposal form setting out the details of the risk and it will
be observed that this proposal is incorporated in the policy and thus made part
of the policy. Any material misrepresentation may adversely affect the validity of
the policy.
b. Premium – The Insurance Code provides:
1. “Sec. 77. An insurer is entitled to payment of the premium as soon as
the thing insured is exposed to the peril insured against. Notwithstanding
any agreement to the contrary, no policy or contract of insurance issued
by an insurance company is valid and binding unless and until the
premium thereof has been paid, except in the case of a life or an
industrial life policy whenever the grace period provisions applies.
2. Under Sec. 64 of the Insurance Code, non-payment of the premium is
one of the grounds that allows an insurance company to cancel a policy.
2) Section I – LIABILITY TO THE PUBLIC
a. Principal provision – to pay all sums necessary to discharge liability of the
insured in respect of bodily injury and/or death to any THIRD PARTY, in
an accident caused by or arising out of the use of the scheduled vehicle
provided that the insured’s liability shall have first been determined. 
Essential Elements
1. the purpose is to indemnify the insured
2. there must be an accident
3. the accident must have been caused by or arose out of the use of
the motor vehicle
4. the insured must be legally liable.
b. Limits of Liability – as specified in the schedule in accordance with the
law.
c. Who are protected – (1) Insured and (2) Authorized driver
d. Extended Protection – This insurance protection covers the insured even
when personally driving another private car not belonging to him and not
hired by him under a hire purchase agreement.
e. Note that this policy provisions is in compliance with the Compulsory
Motor Vehicle insurance law.
3) Section II – NO FAULT INDEMNITY
a. Policy Provision – the insurance company will pay any claim for bodily
injury and/or death to any THIRD PARTY or passenger without the
necessity of proving fault or negligence of any kind.
b. Conditions
1. total indemnity of any one third-party-not to exceed P10,000
subject to schedule of indemnities.
2. Proof of loss, under oath:
a. Police report of accident or any evidence sufficient to
establish the accident.
b. Medical report and evidence of medical or hospital
expenses; and/or
c. Death Certificate and evidence sufficient to establish the
proper payee.
c. Who will pay No-Fault
1. Claim must be made against only one vehicle owner or insurer.
2. If third party is occupant of a vehicle – insurer of vehicle in which
he is riding, mounting or dismounting will pay “No-Fault”.
3. In any other case – insurer of the directly offending vehicle will
pay. 
4) Section III – LOSS OR DAMAGE
This part of the policy protects the vehicle described in the schedule, its
accessories and spare parts.
a. The CAUSES of loss or damage covered by the Policy
1. accidental collision or overturning
2. accidental collision or overturning consequent upon mechanical
breakdown or consequent upon wear and tear.
3. Fire, external explosion, self-ignition or lightning or
4. burglary, house breaking or theft.
5. Malicious act.
6. Whilst in transit (including the process of loading and unloading)
accidental to transit by road, rail, inland waterway, lift or
elevator).
b. Methods of Indemnity – At the OPTION of the INSURANCE COMPANY:
1. Pay in cash the amount of loss or damage
2. Repair, Reinstate
3. Replace the vehicle
Conditions:
1. Insurer’s liability shall not exceed the cost of the parts or
damaged and the reasonable cost of fitting such parts or value of
the vehicle at the time of the loss.
2. Insured’s estimate of value of the vehicle as stated in the
schedule of the policy will be the maximum amount payable.
3. For the cost of replacement parts, the amount of settlement shall
be the cost of brand new part(s) to replace. The damage parts
less the following depreciation schedule (not applicable in case of
total loss).
For Private Cars
Age of Vehicle
Rate of
Depreciation
(share of the
insured)
Age of Vehicle
Rate of Depreciation
(share of the
Insured)
Up to 3 years Nil Over 6 years up to 7 years 35%
Over 3 years up to 4 years 20% Over 7 years 40%
Over 4 years up to 5 years 25% Batteries, Tires, Ball
Over 5 years up to 6 years 30% Joint, Tie Rods, & Shock
Absorbers
45% 
For Commercial Vehicles
Age of Vehicle
Rate of
Depreciation
(share of the
insured)
Age of Vehicle
Rate of Depreciation
(share of the
Insured)
Up to 3 years Nil Over 6 years up to 7 years 40%
Over 3 years up to 4 years 25% Over 7 years 45%
Over 4 years up to 5 years 30% Rebuilt & Reconditioned
Vehicle 45%
Over 5 years up to 6 years 35% Batteries, Tires, Ball
Joint, Tie Rods, & Shock
Absorbers
50%
5) Section IV – EXCESS LIABILITY INSURANCE
This additional insurance, if requested, must be specified in the policy and the
premium for such coverage must be paid.
This is the part of the policy that covers LIABILITY of the Insured which are not
covered under Section I because of the limits in the schedule.
a. Policy Provision
1. The Insurance Company will reimburse the insured for all sums actually
paid by the Insured to discharge liability in accordance with all the
provisions of Section I except the limits of liability for Section I but only in
excess of:
a. the limits of liability of Sections I and II when such limits have
been exhausted, or
b. the liability limits required for scheduled vehicle under Section 377
of the Insurance Code in the event no coverage exists as
described in par.(a)
2. The Company will pay all sums necessary to discharge liability of the
insured in respect of Damage to property in an accident caused by or
arising out of the use of the scheduled vehicle or in connection with the
loading or unloading of the scheduled vehicle.
Provided that:
a. Insured’s liability shall have first been determined either
- by final court judgment after actual trial, or
- by written agreement of insured, the claimant, and the
 insurance company 
b. The Company shall not be liable in respect of damage to property
belonging to the Insured, or held in trust by, or in the custody or
control of the insured or any member of the Insured’s household
or being conveyed by the scheduled vehicle.
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS UNDER ANY SECTION
The following are not covered by the Policy:
1. Liability incurred outside the Philippines
2. Accident or liability whilst the vehicle is
- being used otherwise than in accordance with the limitations as to use.
 - being driven by any person other than an Authorized Driver.
3. Liability by virtue of an agreement but which would not have attached in the
absence of agreement (except amicable settlement on minor accident to avoid
impairing flow of traffic).
4. Except claims under Sec. I and II, any loss, damage or liability, DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY, PROXIMATELY OR REMOTELY occasioned by, contributed to by or
traceable to or ARISING OUT OF, or IN CONNECTION with
- flood, typhoon, hurricane
 - volcanic eruption, earthquake or other convulsion of nature
- invasion, the act of foreign enemies, hostilities or warlike operations (whether
 war be declared or not)
- civil commotion, mutiny, rebellion, insurrection, military or usurped power
- or by any direct or indirect consequences of any of said occurrences
 The burden of proof for claim during the above circumstances is on the insured.
5. Any sum the insured could recover were it not for an agreement between the
insured and other party.
6. Bodily injury or death of:
- any person in the employ of the insured
 - any member of insured’s household who is riding in the vehicle 
IMPORTANT CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SECTIONS
The following are conditions the Insured must know:
1. Notice – Every notice or communication regarding this policy must be
delivered in writing to the Company.
2. Safeguard of Vehicle – The Insured shall
- take reasonable steps to safeguard from loss or damage.
 - maintain the vehicle in efficient condition.
- not leave the vehicle unattended without proper precautions to prevent
 further loss or damage in the event of any accident or breakdown.
- in case of theft or other criminal act which may give rise to a claim,
 give immediate notice to police and cooperate with the Company in
 securing conviction.
3. Notice of Claim
The insured shall, as soon as possible, give notice to the Company with
full particulars.
Every letter, claim, writ, summons and process shall be notified and
forwarded to the Company immediately on receipt.
4. Admission, Offer, Promise or Payment
No admission, offer, promise or payment shall be made by or on behalf of
the insured without the written consent of the Company.
5. Relinquish Conduct of Defense
The Company may pay to the Insured and the Third Party Claimant
jointly the full amount of the Company’s liability and relinquish the
conduct of any defense, settlement or proceedings.
6. Cancellations
Both the insurance company and the insured has the right to have the
policy cancelled.
7. In case of difference or dispute as to amount of Company’s liability,
arbitration is condition precedent to any action or suit upon the policy. 
Part 5: ACCIDENT & HEALTH INSURANCE
A. Hazards to which Income – Earning Individuals (Income Producers)
are subject:
1. Premature Natural Death – or dying too soon
2. Economic Death – or living too long
3. Disability Due to accident
4. Disability Due to Illness
B. Insurances for the physical and economic well-being of individuals
Life Insurance is the instrument which affords protection against the first two
hazards. By means of its policies, the family is guaranteed against the economic
consequences of the husband’s or father’s death, and the insured himself is
protected against the time when his earning days are over that the he becomes
a burden to the family.
Disability Insurance finds its uses in continuing the income of the insured during
the time when by reason of injury or illness he is unable to work. It has also a
collateral function in indemnifying the insured against the heavy additional
expenses which disability always entails.
Personal Accident (PA) Insurance – is that particular type of insurance which
provides benefits/indemnity in case of losses to the person or physical well-being
of an insured individual arising out of accident.
Types of Losses that can be sustained by the individual from accident and types
of Benefits available.
1. Accidental Loss of Life – Lump sum called Principal Sum
2. Accidental Loss of Limb or sight – Lump sum called Capital Sum
3. Loss of Income – Fixed cash benefits usually payable on weekly basis
4. Medical Expense – Medical Reimbursement
Health Insurance – includes a variety of individual and group coverage whose
basic purpose is to reimburse the cost of medical treatment and replace the lost
income in case of illness or injuries.
Forms of Health Insurance:
1) Basic Hospital Expense Insurance
2) Basic Surgical Expense Insurance
3) Physician’s Attendance Benefit
4) Major Medical Expense Insurance 
C. Underwriting – unlike in property insurance where an ocular inspection of the
risks being insured can be made prior to binding of coverage, the personal
accident underwriter usually has just to content himself with an accomplished
application form to form a picture of the person he is insuring.
The application form for PA insurance usually provides for at least the following
information:
1. Name 6. Beneficiary
2. Age 7. Health Status
3. Sex 8. Insurance History
4. Address 9. Existing Insurance
5. Occupation 10. Signature
Occupational Classification – The exposure of a person to accident is a function
of the type of work he does or his occupation.
4 Major Occupational Classes:
Class I - Non-hazardous occupation with office or travel duties
Class II - Limited occupational exposure
Class III - Skilled and semi-skilled with moderate occupational
exposure
Class IV - Skilled and semi-skilled with extensive occupational
exposure
D. Application of Fundamental Insurance Principles on Accident and
Health Insurance
1. Utmost Good Faith. Although both parties to the proposed insurance
contract are bound by this doctrine, the duty of disclosure is more exacting
on the person applying for insurance. The prospective insured alone knows,
or should know, all the material facts that will have bearing on his
acceptability for this type of insurance, and it is his duty to disclose them.
2. Indemnity. A personal accident policy, as a rule, is not a contract of
indemnity but a benefit policy. Under a contract of indemnity, the amount
recoverable is measured by the extent of the insured’s financial loss. On the
other hand, a benefit policy is a contract to pay a sum of money in the event
of certain contingency, it is however wrong to state that a personal accident
policy is never a contract of indemnity. An employer may undertake to pay
an employee full wages in the event of his disablement and insure his liability
to do so. This is a contract of indemnity and the usual consideration applies. 
In practice, the principle of indemnity is preserved as fas as possible by not
granting higher benefits than those justified by the applicant’s financial
standing. Whenever possible, if the sums insured seem large for a person of
a particular occupation and age, tactful inquiries should be made to see
whether he might be better off disabled than when working.
3. Subrogation. The right of subrogation, by which insurers run after Third
Parties causing the loss, arises only from a contract of indemnity. Since the
great majority of personal accident policies are not contracts of indemnity,
subrogation does not apply. This means that an insured may collect the
benefits payable under his policy and, in addition, claim against a negligent
third party, receiving compensation from him as though no benefit had been
received from any insurance.
4. Contribution. This, like subrogation, does not apply where the contract is not
one of indemnity. An insured may hold several personal accident policies and
is entitled to the full benefits of each. The total insurance benefits from the
several sources could therefore be far in excess of the insured’s usual
income. A safeguard is sometime provided by requiring the proposer to
disclose particulars of any other insurances held, so that it may be confirmed
that the combined benefits correspond to the proposer’s income.
5. Insurable Interest. This is always necessary for a valid insurance contract.
An individual is deemed to have an unlimited interest in his own person. In
many personal accident contracts, therefore, insurable interest presents no
problem, but the principle calls for special consideration if the insurance is
taken on another person. Examples are an employer who insures his
employees, or a wife who insures her husband. In most insurance contracts,
the insured must have an insurable interest at the time of loss, but with
personal accident insurance and life insurance, it is thought to be sufficient if
there was a valid interest when the policy was issued or when it was last
renewed.
6. Proximate Cause. The doctrine of proximate cause is important in dealing
with personal accident claims, because more than one cause may operate to
produce the condition resulting in the claim. It must then be ascertained
whether the dominant and effective cause was an insured peril on one which
was excluded from the contract.
As an example, an insured suffers from gall stones, is knocked down by a
motor car and dies, although but for the gall stones he would not have died.
His death is not an accident within the policy (Cawley V. National Employers,
1885).
E. The Policy Form.
The policy form to be considered in this lesson is that in general use for annual
contracts. The wording and arrangement of the principal clauses vary with
insurers. There are two forms existing: the Continental or British form and the 
American form. One clear difference between the two is in the scale of
Indemnities for non-death losses. The continental form defines “loss” as
meaning amputation or loss of use, whereas the American form defines it as only
actual severance or dismemberment. The constituent parts of a Personal
Accident policy is the same as other policies, earlier discussed and need not be
repeated here. 
Part 6: AVIATION INSURANCE
1. DEFINITION
Aviation insurance is an insurance against risk of loss or liability which may be
incurred in connection with the ownership or operation of an aircraft.
2. TYPES OF COVERAGES
a) Hull Insurance - provides coverage for actual physical loss of or
damage to the insured aircraft from fire, explosion, windstorm, theft,
crash or other causes while in flight, taxiing, moored or on the ground.
b) Liability Insurance
aa. Third Party Liability - indemnifies the insured in respect of all
sums which the latter may be legally held liable for death and/or
bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership or
operation of the aircraft.
bb. Passenger Legal Liability - protects the insured against legal
liability arising out of the death or injury of any passenger whilst
boarding, in or disembarking from the aircraft.
cc. Passenger Admitted Liability - (sometimes called Passenger
Voluntary Settlement Endorsement) - pays benefits in respect of
accidental bodily injury sustained by any passenger even if the
owner or operator of the aircraft it not legally liable.
dd. Combined Single Limit Liability - as the title implies, the
coverage states the insurer’s maximum liability for any one or any
combination of the above coverage) other than Hull).
ee. Pilot Seat Accident Insurance - provides for accident
insurance covering any authorized pilot operating the aircraft at
the time of the occurrence which gives rise to a claim for bodily
injury or death of the pilot.
ff. Medical Expense Reimbursement - provides for
reimbursement of medical, hospital or surgical expenses incurred
due to any accident resulting in death or bodily injury to
passengers or pilot. 
3. UNDERWRITING INFORMATION
a) Description of Aircraft
aa. Airframe
i Make, Type and Series Number
ii Year of Manufacture
iii Declared Maximum Number of Passengers to be carried at
any one time
iv Identification Marks
bb. Engine
i Number and Type
cc. Extra Equipment and Accessories
dd. Values
i Aircraft with standard instruments and equipment
ii Details of extra equipment and accessories
b) Geographical Limit - Republic of the Philippines
c) Pilot - The aircraft will be operated in flight only by a named pilot or as
approved by the assured subject to a certain number of flying hours.
d) Uses
aa. Business and Pleasure - personal, pleasure, family and
business uses excluding any operation for hire or reward or for
instruction.
bb. Industrial Aid - all the uses stated in business and pleasure
also the transportation of executives, employees, guests of the
insured, goods and merchandise but excluding any operation for
hire or reward or for instruction.
cc. Limited Commercial - all uses in business and pleasure and
industrial aid also the carriage of passengers and freight for hire
or reward but excluding any form of instructions or rental to
others.
dd. Commercial - all the uses stated in the foregoing also use for
any other purpose to be specifically declared. 
Part 7 MISCELLANEOUS INSURANCE
LINES: CRIME INSURANCE
A. Burglary, Robbery and Theft Insurance
Burglary, robbery and theft insurance pays for losses which are due to criminal
activities. For this reason, this line is often referred to as “Crime Insurance”.
There are a very large number of Crime policies however only a few of them are
completely standardized. The majority of them, though, use approximately the
same definitions.
B. Characteristic of Crime Policies
Certain characteristics differentiate Burglary, Robbery and Theft from other types
of policies:
1. The act insured against is a violation of the law;
2. There is a considerable amount of adverse selection and crime coverage
tends to be purchased only by persons who feel they are exposed to a high
degree of risk;
3. The crimes insured against are defined in the policy, and the policy definition
governs regardless of any statutory definition;
4. Policies are generally named-risk contracts. However, a few coverages are
written on an all-risk basis;
5. The property insured is often of high value, since it is natural for criminals to
attracted to especially valuable property;
6. Co-insurance is often required as a means of combating the tendency toward
underinsurance. First loss cover, however, may also be granted but at a high
premium rate.
C. Differences between Crime Coverages
1. As to the hazards covered, that is, burglary, robbery, theft, mysterious
disappearance, etc.
2. Whether coverage applies on the premises, off the premises, or both.
3. The type of property to the covered. Some contract limit the coverage to
stock only while others apply only to money and securities. 
4. Persons who are covered. Some contracts cover only specified persons such
as paymasters or messengers.
5. The manner in which the limits of liability apply. This concerns whether the
insurance is on blanket or scheduled basis.
6. Whether the property covered is personal, business, or professional property.
7. Whether the contract is written on a specified perils or all-risk basis.
D. Make-up of Burglary, Robbery and Theft Contracts
The usual crime policies are composed of four sections:
1. Declarations – contain information regarding the insured, his address, his
past losses, and such additional information as is necessary to properly
identify the insured and assist in rating the policy.
2. Insuring Agreement – sets out the circumstances under which the insurers
are liable to the insured and must be read in conjunction with the
declarations.
3. Exclusions – specify those types of property and those perils which are not
within the scope of the policy.
4. Conditions – cover such diverse matters as claims procedure, proofs of loss,
cancellation, other insurance, changes and the like.
E. Damage Caused by Criminal or attempted Criminal Acts
When premises are broken into by thieves, there is usually a certain amount of
damage to them. In some cases this may be negligible, while in others, it may be
very extensive. There are numerous cases where criminals frustrated in their
attempts at a theft, have deliberately wrecked the premises. It is the general
practice of all burglary, robbery and theft contracts to cover damage caused by
commission or attempted commission of an act which is covered by the policy.
Damage which results from an act not covered by the policy would of course, not
come within its scope. Thus a policy covering only robbery would not pay for
damage which resulted from an attempted burglary and vice- versa.
Definition of Terms
Crime coverages will usually contain a specific definition of the acts which are
covered. Burglary, robbery and theft are sometimes defined in different ways.
Therefore, it is necessary that the policy give as specific definition, so that there
may be no question as to what is included in the coverage. The following
definitions are taken from typical policies: 
1. Burglary - The felonious abstraction of property from within the premises, by
any person or persons making felonious entry therein by actual force and
violence when such premises are not open for business, of which there shall
be visible marks made upon the exterior of the premises at the place of such
entry by tools, explosives, electricity or chemicals.
2. Robbery - the felonious taking of insured property
(1) by violence inflicted upon a custodian,
(2) by putting him in fear of violence,
(3) by any other overt felonious act committed in his presence and of
which he is actually cognizant, provided such act is not committed
by an officer, partner of employee of the insured,
(4) from the person or direct care and custody of a custodian who has
been killed or rendered unconscious by injuries inflicted
maliciously or sustained accidentally.

3. Theft - Any act of stealing
4. Money - Means currency, coins, bank notes and bullion
5. Securities - All negotiable and non-negotiable instruments or contracts
representing either money or other property and includes revenue and other
stamps in current use, tokens, and tickets, but does not include money.
6. Business - Includes trade, profession, or occupation
7. Premises - There are different definitions of “premises” in various contracts
due to the fact that some are intended to cover only the immediate premises,
while other contain various extensions. Policies issued to cover business firms
often contain following definition of premises: “That portion of the interior of
any building or buildings which is occupied in whole or in part by the insured
in conducting its business”. (Where the contract is issued to cover the
personal activities of the insured, the policy will often define premises to
include grounds, garages, stables, and other outbuildings).
8. Insured - The policy definition varies from contract to contract. The major
distinction is whether the contract covers only the named insured or whether
it also applies to other persons. Crime coverages issued to individual often
include members of the insured family, while they are a resident of the
insured’s household, as well as the named insured. However, in such cases it
is customary to exclude resident employees, and persons unrelated to the
named insured. However, in such cases it is customary to exclude resident
employees, and persons unrelated to the named insured or his spouse who
pay board or rent to the insured or his spouse.
9. Guard - Any male person not less than seventeen nor more than sixty-five
years of age who accompanies a custodian by direction of the insured, but
who is not a driver of a public conveyance. 
10. Larceny - The terms “larceny” and “theft” are generally identical, and
therefore are used interchangeably. A theft involves the taking of the
personal possesions of another with a dishonest intent. Since “theft” and
“larceny” include both burglary and robbery, it is not necessary to define the
latter terms in policies covering theft or larceny. There are other terms found
in this general line of insurance, which essentially mean the same as above.
For example, one might find a policy covering “wrongful abstraction” or
“willful mis-application” of funds. It is sufficient to state that these terms are
essentially the same as those already mentioned. It is important to note,
however, that burglary, robbery and theft policies never cover losses caused
through the dishonesty of the insured or his employee. Coverage for
employee dishonesty is provided by Fidelity Insurance or Fidelity Bond.
Types of Policies
Crime policies may be classified on the basis of the peril which they insured -
burglary, robbery or theft. They may also be classified as to the buyer -
individuals or commercial establishments. A third possible classification is
whether the contract provides a limited or broad type of coverage. Examples of
type of crime coverages are as follows:
1. Individual Coverages
a. Broad Form Personal Theft - covers mysterious disappearance
b. Limited form Personal Theft - does not cover mysterious disappearance.
2. Business Coverages
a. Mercantile Open Stock Burglary > covers not only the stocks
 of business enterprise but
b. Mercantile Open Stock Theft > also its fixtures, machinery
 & equipment & premises
c. Mercantile Safe Burglary - Covers money and securities in safe lost by
burglary.
d. Mercantile Robbery - Covers money and securities and other property lost
by robbery.
e. Paymaster robbery - Covers loss of payroll funds caused by Robbery
inside or outside the premises of the insured.
f. Money and Securities Broad Form - This is practically an all-risk cover for
money and securities inside or outside premises. 
Part 8: MISCELLANEOUS INSURANCE LINES:
LIABILITY INSURANCE
A. Liability Insurance.
It goes under diverse names as “General Liability Insurance”, Third Party Liability
Insurance” and “Liability other than Automobile”. It is basically designed to
cover the responsibility for payment which an insured may incur to other
members of the public because of bodily injury or property damage which they
have suffered. In order for the insured to be held responsible for bodily injury or
property damage to others, he must have incurred such liability as a matter of
law or have voluntarily agreed to it as a matter of contract (Contractual Liability).
Liability insurance is often referred to as “Third Party Insurance” since there are
always three parties involved – the Insurance company, the policyholder and the
injured third party. This situation is in contrast to that in most insurance
coverages in which there are only two parties – the insurer and the insured.
B. Major Types of Liability Insurance available in the market
1. Business Liability Coverages
a. Owners’ landlords’ and tenants’
b. Manufacturers’ and contractors’
c. Elevator Liability
d. Products Liability
e. Owners’ or Contractors’ Protective Liability
f. Contractual Liability
2. Professional Liability Coverages
a. Physicians’, Surgeons’ and Dentists’ Malpractice
b. Druggist Liability
c. Hospital Liability
3. Personal Liability Coverages
a. Residence Liability
b. Sports Liability
c. Dog Liability
4. Comprehensive Liability Policies
a. Comprehensive General Liability
b. Comprehensive Personal Liability 
C. The Liability Hazard: Negligence. Any action which results in harm to
another person may be either a criminal act or civil act. A criminal act such as
murder or robbery, is a crime against society and is punished by the state. A civil
wrong is a wrong against a specific person and constitutes an invasion of the
rights of this third party. Civil wrongs are divided into two types: torts and
breach of contract.
Liability Insurance Policies. Are primarily concerned with paying for damages
caused by the negligence of the insured. Negligence is a tort. The usual legal
remedy in case involving civil wrongs is a suit for monetary damages. Liability
insurance covers those sums which may be awarded to an injured party due to
negligence on the part of the insured.
Negligence. May be defined as "a failure to exercise due care". There are
numerous unavoidable accidents for which it is unfair to hold anyone legally
responsible. The right of recovery for damages due to negligence arises from the
fact that society expects every person to conduct himself in such a way as not to
injure other members of society. As a matter of self-protection, society requires
that every person take into account the result of his actions on other persons. If
a person fails to exercise such due care and bodily injury or property damage
results, the injured party may have a right to reimbursement.
D. Liability vs Accident Insurance. A careful distinction must be made between
liability insurance and accident insurance. Both kinds of contracts may pay a
person who has been injured. However. many people have the mistaken belief
that if someone is injured, and insurance is carried, the injured party is entitled
to compensation. This is not the case, since the liability contract pays only if the
insured is legally obligated to pay the injured party. The fact that the insured,
under a liability contract, may feel partly responsible for payment of the injured
party's medical expenses, for example, is entirely irrelevant. The burden of proof
generally rests on the injured party to prove that the person who injured him
was negligent. Theoretically, no insurance company issuing a liability policy need
pay until such time as a decision is rendered by a competent court. Practically
speaking, of course, most companies find it preferable to settle cases out of
court if they feel that the facts of the case are such that the court would
eventually hold the insured liable.
E. On-Premises vs Off-Premises Coverage. Certain contracts are written to
cover liability arising from activities on the premises, others to cover liability
incurred off-premises, and some cover both situations. The Owner's, Landlord's
and Tenant's policy, for example, is primarily designed to cover liability arising
out of accidents in and around the place of business.
The Completed Operations section of the Products Liability policy is designed to
cover off the premises of the insured. The Comprehensive Personal Liability
policy covers occurrences both on the and off the premises of the insured. 
F. Direct vs Contingent Liability Contracts. The majority of liability contracts
cover the direct liability imposed by law which the insured may incur to others.
So called contingent or protective liability policies cover the liability of the insured
which is due to liability incurred by other person. For example, a general
contractor may be responsible for an accident of his sub-contractor, and this may
be covered under a contingent liability policy.
G. General Make-up of Public Liability Policies.
1. Face of the Policy - contains such routine information as name and address
of insured, policy period, occupation of the insured and certain declaration
made by the insured concerning details of his operations.
2. Insuring Agreement - the heart of the liability contract composed of the
insuring agreements which, generally speaking, are as follows:
a. Coverage A - Bodily Injury Liability - To indemnify the Insured for loss by
reason of the liability imposed by law upon the Insured, or assumed by
him under contract as defined herein, for damages, including damages
for care and loss of services, because of bodily injury, including death at
any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons caused
by accident.
Coverage B - Property Damage Liability - To indemnify the Insured for
loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon the Insured or
assumed by him under contract as defined herein, for damages because
of injury to or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof
caused by accident.
b. Defense, Settlement, Supplementary Payments - To indemnify the
Insured for all legal expense (including taxed court costs and interest on
that part of any verdict, judgment or award covered under this policy)
incurred with the consent of the company in connection with any suit,
even if groundless, brought against the Insured on account of this policy,
including the premiums on appeal bonds and release of attachment
bonds filed by the Insured in such suits.
3. General Exclusion in Liability Contracts - the following are the major
exclusions generally found in liability contracts:
a. Liability arising from the ownership or operation of aircraft.
b. Liability arising from the ownership or operation of automobile, boats or
other watercraft.
c. Any sickness or injury incurred by employees.
d. The war risk.
e. Damage to property in the care, custody or control of the Insured. 
f. Injury by products manufactured or sold by the insured or work which
has been completed by the Insured of which the accident arises, unless
specifically assumed.
g. Liability due to work of independent contractors or as a result of
structural alterations, unless specifically assumed.
h. Contractual liability, unless specifically assumed.
i. Elevator liability, unless specifically assumed.
j. Intentional injury or damage.
4. Conditions - Cover such diverse matters as claims procedure, proofs of loss,
cancellation, other insurance, changes and the like.
H. Limits of Liability. Liability Policies often contain separate limits for Bodily
Injury and for Property Damage. In addition, there is usually a separate perperson
limit and per-accident limit for the Bodily Injury portion. The per-person
limit is the maximum the company will pay to any one person. The per-accident
limit is the maximum the company will pay for any given accident regardless of
the number of persons who may be involved. With respect to property damage
liability, there is a single limit applying to any accident. Some policies contain an
aggregate policy limit for both Bodily Injury and Property Damage, which is the
maximum amount the company will pay during any given policy year.
I. Comprehensive General Liability. This is the broadest form of public liability
coverage normally made available. This policy has five sub-divisions:
1. Premises/Operations Liability - This is the basic and most important section
of the CGL contract. It provides coverages for claims arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of the insured's premises and any and all
operations performed by the Insured.
2. Elevator Liability - This coverage pays for liability arising form the ownership,
maintenance, or use of elevators. Coverage applies while members of the
public are in the elevator, or leaving or entering it. Strangely enough, it is
possible to endorse this section of the policy to include "collision" insurance
under which the company agrees to pay "direct and accidental loss of or
damage to elevators and other property caused by collision of elevator or
anything carried thereon with another object".
3. Independent Contracts - also known as Owner's or Contractor's Protective
Liability, this type of cover represents a change from the general pattern of
liability contracts. It is not a direct coverage for the acts of the insured, but a
contingent coverage for the acts of others. It is sometimes referred to as a
"defense coverage" since it is often purchased because of the promise of the
insurance company to defend the insured in court against all lawsuits. The
purpose of this section is to cover the insured against liability which has been
incurred by others, but for which the insured may be secondarily liable. 
4. Products Liability Completed Operations Coverage - In essence this coverage
is designed to pay for accidents which result from mistakes in the
manufacture or preparation of products or the rendering of service work. The
coverage provides that the accident must occur -
• away from the insured's premises
• after the insured has relinquished the products to others.
The Products Liability coverage applies to those who manufacture or market
products to be sold to others. The completed operations section is applicable
primarily to firms engaged in the servicing, installation and repair work. It
should be particularly noted that under the property damage section, there is
an exclusion for damage to the product or premises out of which the accident
arises. Thus, if a can of hair spray explodes, injuring the user and breaking
the mirror in front of which he is sitting, the company would pay for the
injury of the user and the replacement of the broken mirror, but not to the
replacement of the can of hair spray.
5. Contractual liability - It has been previously noted that most liability policies
cover only the "liability imposed by law''. Contractual liability insurance is
written to cover a different hazard, namely, liability which the insured has
voluntarily assumed under a contract with a Third party. The CGL policy
automatically covers the following contractual assumptions of liability:
a. a lease of premises
b. a sidetrack agreement
c. elevator or escalator maintenance agreement
d. an easement required by municipal ordinance in connection with the work
for the municipality.
In addition, other types of agreements may be covered by this section if the
company is willing to insure them. Other types of agreements must be specially
submitted to the company for individual examination and rating. This must be
specifically included by endorsement under this policy.
Part 9 ENGINEERING INSURANCE
I. Engineering Insurance: Its Scope
Engineering Insurance refers collectively to such specialty insurance lines which
seemingly are too technical for an insurance layman to handle and which
comprise the following insurance product lines: Contractors’ All-Risks Insurance,
Erection All-Risks Insurance, Machinery Breakdown Insurance, Loss of Profits
following Machinery Breakdown Insurance, Deterioration of Stocks Insurance,
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance & Electronic Equipment Insurance. 
II. Coverage Features
A. Contractors’ All Risks (CAR) Insurance – Covers “All Risks” arising out of the
construction of buildings or structures. It is a property insurance by which
any building or civil engineering project is protected against accidents
resulting in physical damage to or the destruction of works in progress,
construction plant and equipment and/or construction machinery on the site.
Furthermore, the third party liability arising out of the construction can be
additionally covered.
a. Necessity for CAR Insurance
The work of the contractor is not – as in the case of industrial production
– performed in the factory or workshop where, to a large extent,
precautions for preventing damage can be taken. As a rule, the
contractor works on a building site exposed to unknown and unforseeable
dangers, such as subsidence, ground water, flood and inundation, as well
as to unfavorable weather conditions which may cause damage.
Moreover, he has to contend with the potential liability claims, that may
be caused to Third parties. Owing to keen competition, contracting firms
are often not in a position to include in their prices a sufficient margin for
the risks involved, if they wish their tender to be successful. This is
especially true in view of the fact that they may also be answerable for
losses and damage sustained by the contract works until these are taken
over by the project owners. Directly connected with this risk is the
additional liability carried out for the purpose of complying with his
obligations under the maintenance clause of the building contract.
For good reasons, project owners, consulting engineers, architects and
financiers have made the acceptance of tender dependent on a CAR
insurance being effected.
b. Subject-matter Insured
aa. Primarily covers the “work” to be carried out under the contract and
includes all materials stored on the site but not yet incorporated in
the structure. “Work” means the execution of all permanent contract
works by the contractors, including preparatory work on the site,
grading, levelling, excavation and other earth work, as well as the
execution of temporary works provided for in the plans and
separately paid for by the project owners or principal.
The value of material supplied by the principal must be added to the
sum insured, since it constitutes property held in trust or custody.
CAR can generally be taken out for all building and civil engineering
projects, such as:
Dwelling houses, office buildings, warehouse, hospitals, schools,
factories, silos, water towers, bridges, dams, canals, tunnels,
irrigation & water supply systems, drainage & sewer systems, 
roads, railway, runways, construction work in connection with
power stations, ports, airports, etc.
bb. Construction plant and equipment which is used on the site at the
discretion of the contractor, such as:
Sheds, stores, tracks, temporary accommodation and other
temporary buildings, scaffoldings, form work, power supply &
distributing plant, water supply installation, auxiliary bridges,
piers, etc.
The construction machinery used for the execution of the contract
works, such as excavators, bulldozers, rollers, pile drivers, vibrators,
concrete mixers, cranes, hoists, drilling machines, air compressors,
pumps, dumpers, trucks not licensed for use on public roads etc may
also be included for insurance, whether or not this machinery is the
property of the contractor or is on hire.
cc. If the installation and/or erection of machinery and/or steel structure
is included under the building contract, such can be insured also
under CAR provided the value of installation and erection works
(which normally should be covered under Erection All Risks) is less
than 50% of the total sum insured.
dd. CAR may also include Third Party Liability for fatal or non-fatal injury
and property damage arising from the construction up to the agreed
limit. Persons who are employed by the Insured on the site are not
however, considered as third party, but can be covered under
separate personal accident insurance or Workmen’s Compensation
insurance.
c. Insured Perils: CAR covers the following:
1. Loss or damage caused by:
a. “Acts of God”
aa. storm, tempest, hurricane, cyclone, typhoon, tidal wave
bb. flood, inundation
cc. landslide, rockslide, subsidence, earthquake
dd. lightning
2. Loss or damage consequent upon:
a. The use of faulty or unsuitable material
b. Bad Workmanship
c. Faulty design for which either the principal or the contractor or an
independent architect or consulting engineers is responsible. 
However the costs of rectifying defects in material, design or
workmanships, that is, the costs of replacing parts found to be
defective are not covered by the insurance.
3. Loss of or damage to material, construction plant, equipment and/or
machinery occurring during unloading and/or loading, including
intermediate storage on the site. The same applies to construction
plant, equipment and machinery whilst being erected and/or
dismantled.
4. Loss or damage caused by burglary, theft or sabotage.
d. Excluded Perils
1. War or warlike operations, invasion, civil war, strike, riot, rebellion,
civil commotion, confiscation or destruction by order of authorities.
2. Nuclear reaction, nuclear radiation or radioactive contamination.
3. Mechanical and/or electrical breakdown of construction machinery,
plant and equipment, normal atmospheric influence, corrosion,
oxidation or wear and tear (loss or damage consequent thereon is
however covered by CAR insurance).
4. Acts or orders made by the Insured or by his authorized
representatives, if such acts or orders are contrary to recognized rules
of engineering or to any legal regulation or provision.
5. Loss of or damage to files, bills, notes, cash, securities.
6. Loss of property discovered during the making of an inventory.
7. Penalties under contracts, fines, losses incurred as a result of delays
in the completion of contract works or cancellation of the contract.
8. Loss or damage due to partial or total cessation or work.
9. Loss or damage to motor vehicles licensed for general use on public
highways, watercraft and aircraft.
10. Third party liability claims under motor vehicle TPL.
e. Policy Period – Maintenance Period
CAR Insurance unlike other insurance, is not an annual insurance. The
cover provided attaches from the commencement of the work at the site
and remains in force until the contract works are completed and taken
over by the principal or put into service by the latter. It is advisable for
the Insured to take out fire insurance for any sections of the contract
completed and turned over to the principal.
Since the building site is the insured locations, the construction plant,
equipment and machinery is covered from the time of arriving at the site
until leaving it. 
Upon request, the CAR policy may be extended to cover the subsequent
maintenance period which usually lasts from 3 to 12 months. The cover
during this period is however restricted and is exclusively in respect of
loss or damage arising out of the performance of guarantee work. This
usually consists of works not in accordance with the contract or are in
any way defective.
f. Sum Insured
The sum insured must be equal to the sum of the following:
aa. Contract value – amount laid down in the contract
bb. Additional work performed by day labor and other supplementary
work
cc. Value of building materials and structural parts supplied by principal
dd. The value of the construction plant, equipment and machinery
increases the sum insured where such items are declared for
insurance. They must be insured at their replacement value.
B. Erection All Risks (EAR) Insurance – Is an “All Risks” cover for the entire
duration of the erection, commencing when the machinery and plant
intended for installation is unloaded at the site and continuing during storage
on the site, during erection and the subsequent test period. EAR provides a
very comprehensive cover for machinery mechanical equipment, apparatus,
steel construction of any kind while in the process of installation in factories
and industrial plants such as oil refineries, sugar mills, cement plants, paper
mills, etc.
a. Necessity for EAR Insurance
The progress of industrialization, entailing the erection of machinery and
plant of increased size and value has rendered it impossible for firms
engaged in erection to carry the high liabilities involved for their own
account.

b. Subject-matter Insured
aa. Machinery, mechanical equipment, apparatus, steel construction of
any kind on the site where they are subsequently to be used,
including the necessary construction work provided the nature of the
project is predominantly that of an erection;
bb. Pipelines and overhead transmission lines, including all the work
necessary for laying or erecting them;
cc. Second-hand machinery which is in good working order, provided
that the insurance terminates upon the commencement of the 
testing period which is not insurable, in the case of second-hand
machinery. Subject further to the exclusion of loss or damage which
can be proved to have arisen from the previous operation of the
machinery.
dd. Machinery & equipment required to carry out the erection (e.g.
compressors, cranes, mast). Experience has shown that such
machinery & equipment is prone to loss since usually it is used
(second-hand) which is not regularly serviced. In addition it is
exposed to the elements and this must be taken into account in
rating. A condition precedent to insuring erection machinery and
equipment is that the object to be installed or erected is also insured.
ee. Removal of debris, which is especially important where steel
constructions are concerned.
ff. Additional costs incurred for overtime work, work on Sundays and
holidays, as well as express freight. Air freight, however, being
excluded in principle.
c. Insured Perils: EAR covers the following:
aa. Faults in erection
bb. Lack of skill, carelessness, negligence
cc. Malicious damage and sabotage
dd. Theft
ee. Accidents such as falling of objects, breakdown of erection
equipment, or damage to machinery caused by the collapse of
building or parts thereof.
ff. Fire, lightning, explosion
gg. Acts of God: storm, hurricane, tornado, typhoon, cyclone, flood,
inundation, subsidence, landslide, rockslide.
hh. Third party liability for the following damage and/or injuries may be
included:
i damage to property of third parties, including property held in
trust by or under the custody of the insured and for which he is
responsible
ii bodily injuries sustained by third parties excluding employees and
workers of the purchaser or of any contractors.
d. Exclusions
aa. War or warlike actions, strike, riot, civil commotion, nuclear energy.
bb. Deliberate acts or gross negligence on the part of the Insured
cc. Penalties under contract.
dd. Operational deficiencies
ee. Loss or damage arising from faulty design, defects in casting,
defective material, bad workmanship and workshop faults are not 
normally covered by EAR since such losses come under the
manufacturer’s liability and the purchaser has a warranty that such
defects will be made good. If, however, the manufacturer is also the
erector and the policy is made out in his name, the insurance can be
extended to cover such losses against payment of an additional
premium.
e. Period of Insurance
The insurance commences when the property to be insured is unloaded
at the erection site and continues until the machinery or plant is
completely installed or erected and tested. It automatically includes
therefore any storage prior to the commencement of the erection or
during erection and the test operation or test loading, the duration of
which is normally limited to four weeks.
f. Sum Insured
This is the contract price of the machinery or plant, including freight,
customs duties and erection costs. Amounts to be insured for removal of
debris, civil engineering works and third party liability should be fixed
separately.
g. Maintenance Period
If this insurance is provided during the period the suppliers are obliged to
supervise the new machinery or plant and initiate the purchasers
personnel into its operation, it should be noted that the cover includes
only loss or damage caused by errors on the part of the supervising
personnel in the course of training the purchaser’s staff. Any other loss
or damage should be covered under appropriate machinery breakdown,
fire, TPL, etc. policies.
C. Machinery Breakdown (MB) Insurance – Is an “Accident” Insurance on
machinery, mechanical equipment and apparatus, it covers any unforeseen
and sudden loss or damage due to external causes, including human error,
as well as loss or damage due to causes inherent in the machine itself.
a. Necessity for MB Insurance
Anything mechanical or subject to pressure can fail, sometimes with
frightening frequency. Statistics gathered by a large insurance company
show how many machinery objects and their parts will fail and suffer and
accident each year and the cost could pose financial hardships to plant
owners.
b. Examples of Objects Insured under MB Insurance
aa. Turbo generator sets
bb. Transformers
cc. Electric motors
dd. Steam engines, internal combustion engines
ee. Outside equipment such as pile driver, material handling plant,
crane. 
c. Insured Perils
aa. Faulty design bad workmanship, workshop or erection faults, faulty
casting and faulty material
bb. Lack of skill, carelessness, malicious damage
cc. Short-circuit
dd. Shortage or water in boilers
ee. Tearing apart on account of centrifugal force
ff. Physical explosion
gg. Any other damage occurring as a result of unforeseen events.
d. Exclusions
aa. Perils covered under any other types of insurance such as fire,
lightning, chemical explosion, burglary and theft.
bb. Wear and tear, cavitation, erosion, corrosion, rust and boiler-scale.
cc. War or warlike operations, civil commotion, strike, riot etc. nuclear
energy.
dd. Acts of God
ee. Willful or grossly negligent act on the part of the insured or his
employees
ff. Losses covered by warranty
e. Sum Insured
The sum insured should always be the replacement cost of the insured
machinery (replacement value plus customs duty, transportation and
installation charges), since it is necessary in the case of repairs to obtain
new parts to be installed in the damaged machinery.
D. Loss of Profits Following Machinery Breakdown Insurance
a. What it covers
This insurance provides cover for the actual loss of profits sustained as a
result of a business interruption caused by an accident indemnifiable
under machinery breakdown insurance. Basically, a loss due to an
interruption of business is made up of the following factors:
• The reduction in turnover resulting from decreased production
or other impairment of business operations caused by an
accident.
• The increase in cost of working, i.e., the additional
expenditure necessarily and reasonably incurred for avoiding
or diminishing the reduction in turn over.
b. Period of Insurance 
The policy is usually issued on an annual basis normally commencing and
ending at 12 midnight.
c. Sum Insured
The sum insured is made up of the gross profit obtained from the
turnover of goods produced or handled in the course of the Insured’s
business for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months.
d. Indemnity Period
Represents the maximum time for which the insurers is liable for loss of
profit, commences when loss of profits begins. Indemnity period is
usually fixed at 3, 6, 9 or 12 months.
E. Deterioration of Stocks Insurance
a. What it is?
It is an insurance against deterioration of goods placed in cold storage
due to a breakdown of refrigerating machinery.
It is a follow-up cover to machinery breakdown insurance and may only
be taken in connection with the latter.
b. What can be insured?
All goods suitable for storage in cold-storage houses may be covered
such as:
aa. Fruits, like apples, pears, berries, citrus fruit, bananas, etc.
bb. Vegetables like potatoes, onions, carrots, asparagus, cabbage.
cc. Fresh meat, fresh and smoke fish
dd. Dairy products, canned foods, pre-cooked dishes
ee. Beverages
ff. Vaccines, drugs and other substances for medical purposes
gg. Chemical and technical products
c. Period of Insurance
Usually issued on annual basis and ending at 12 midnight.
d. Sum Insured
This is based on the probable maximum sales price obtainable for the
goods during the policy period.
F. Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance
a. What it covers?
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Insurance is an accident insurance for Boilers
and Pressure Vessels against the risk of explosion and collapse.
aa. EXPLOSION means the sudden and violent rending or tearing apart
of the permanent structure of a boiler or other apparatus by force
of internal steam or fluid pressure causing bodily displacement of 
the structure or any part thereof and accompanied by forcible
ejectment of its contents.
bb. COLLAPSE means the sudden and dangerous distortion of any part
of a boiler or other apparatus by bending or crushing caused by
steam or fluid pressure whether attended by rupture or not. A
slowly developing deformation due to any cause is not considered a
“Collapse”.
b. Subject Matter Insured:
aa. Damage to the Boiler or other apparatus described
bb. Damage to surrounding property owned by the Insured
cc. Liability on account of fatal or non-fatal injuries to or damage to the
property of Third Parties.
c. Causes of Explosion or Collapse, Covered under the Policy
aa. Hidden and undetected weaknesses and flaws in condition,
workmanship and materials
bb. The human element
cc. Overloading and failure of protective devices
d. Flue Gas Explosion
Sometimes referred to as a Furnace Explosion is the explosion caused by
the ignition of urburnt gases in the furnace or flues of the boiler. This is
an additional peril to the normal cover and requires an additional
premium.
G. Electronic Equipment Insurance (EEI)
a. What it is?
EEI is designed to provide appropriate cover for all types of electronic
equipment, computers, delicate electric and electro-mechanical
equipment such as radio broadcast, television and camera equipment,
medical, communication, office equipment, etc.
b. Insured Perils
aa. Explosion, fire and lightning
bb. Theft
cc. Short circuit, over voltage, failure of insulation, arcing,
electromagnetic phenomena and implosion
dd. Damage to expendable parts (bulbs, ribbons, belts, tapes, etc.
c. Sum Insured
The new replacement value of a new equivalent item, including packing,
freight, customs duties and cost of installation. 
Part 10 B O N D S
1. DEFINITION
A bond is an agreement among three parties whereby a Surety Company
guarantees the performance by individual (called the Principal) of an obligation
or undertaking in favor of a third party (called the obligee).
The Surety Company undertakes to indemnify the Obligee for whatever loss he
might suffer if the Principal fails to comply with his obligation. A bond is
secondary to the Principal or original contract.
2. PARTIES TO A BOND
a) Surety - is the bonding company
b) Principal - (or obligor) is the guaranteed or bonded party whose conduct
the Surety is held responsible.
c) Obligee - is the insured party in whose favor the bond is issued.
3. BOND TERMS AND CONDITIONS
The terms and conditions of a bond are usually drawn from the primary contract
between the Principal and Obligee or from the laws, rules, and regulations in
case of bonds in favor of the government or any of its instrumentalities. It is
therefore essential that a copy of the basic contract be submitted in order to fully
appreciate the extent of the obligations sought to be covered by the bond
applied for. In case of verbal agreements where the obligations of the Principal
is merely implied as in the case of employment contracts, it may be necessary to
specify in clear unmistakable terms the liability the Surety Company is willing to
assume under the bond. For those obligations imposed by the laws, rules and
regulations of the government and its instrumentalities, a familiarity or frequent
reference to the statutes concerned will be expected of a prudent underwriter.
4. THREE (3) “C’ S” OF SURETY UNDERWRITING
a) Character b) Capacity c) Capital 
5. COLLATERAL REQUIREMENTS
a) Signatures – of two (2) solvent guarantors known as Co-Signers who act
as sureties for the principal under a Counter-Guaranty Agreement.
b) Unencumbered Real Estate - a real estate must be:
aa. First Mortgage
bb. Located within the commercial district of a city
cc. Valued not less than twice the amount of the bond being applied
for.
c) Chattel Mortgages - mortgages on property other than real property.
d) Pledges of Shares of Stocks - as listed in the Stock Exchange.
The valuation of such stock is based on the current market values minus
a certain amount as allowance for fluctuations in the market.
e) Cash Deposit - may be with the company or in any bank.
f) Bank Guarantees - fixed deposits, letters of credit.
g) Government Bonds, Treasury Notes - or other obligations guaranteed as
to Principal and interest by the government.
6. THE INDEMNITY AGREEMENT
For every bond issued, an indemnity agreement is executed between the
Principal and Surety. An indemnity agreement is one which binds the Principal
among other things, to repay the Surety for whatever amount the latter has paid
the Obligee. It is the document by which the bonding company recovers from
the Principal the amount it paid to the Obligee.
The type of bond is not the determining factor in the use of indemnity
agreement IA. It may be said that the security offered to and accepted by the
Surety Company determines what form (short/long) of IA shall be used.
7. TYPES OF BONDS
a) Surety Bonds - is one wherein the bonding company (the Surety
premises to answer financially to the obligee for the debt, default or
conduct of the Principal. Under this kind of bond, the bonding company’s
liability is not limited to any one cause of loss but extends to all losses by
the principal’s actions, provided these losses are covered by the bond. 
aa. Contract Bonds - These are bonds required in connection with
contracts for construction, supply or labor. Under this general
classification are included the bidder’s bonds required prior to the
awarding of these contracts.
1. Bidder’s Bond
1.1 Single Bid - the contract to supply materials
equipment, etc. for certain construction work is
often placed on public bidding. The participants in
these biddings are required to post a bond which
guarantees that if the principal is successful in his
bid, he will enter into a contract with the obligee
and put up a performance bond to guarantee that
the contract awarded to him is faithfully complied
with. The alert bondsman should base his
underwriting judgement into this possibility since
the performance bond is usually for a much larger
amount than the bidder’s bond.
1.2 One Year Standing - the government and its
instrumentalities, regularly calls for bids for the
supply of its needs such as equipment, medical
supplies, drugs, foodstuffs, etc. To simplify
accounting, a single bond is accepted which will
cover all the biddings (for the same obligee) in
which the principal is likely to participate within one
year rather than post a bond each time. This calls
for the One Year Standing Bidder’s Bond which
provides essentially the same coverage as the
ordinary Bidder’s Bond but is applicable to every
bidding participated in by the principal over a
period of one year. The data and the security
required on the One-Year Standing Bond are
substantially the same as those for the regular
Bidder’s Bond.
2. Performance Bond
2.1 Private Construction - like the government,
private individuals and entities often require performance
bonds from contractors who enter into construction
contracts with them. The form and collateral requirement
for this bond are the same as those for government
construction. 
b) Fidelity Bonds - promises to reimburse an employer (Obligee) for any
loss of money or property that the latter might sustain due to the
dishonest act of an employee (the Principal) mentioned in the bond.
When it covers only one employee, it is known as the Individual Fidelity
Bond. When it covers either a number of selected employees or all the
employees of the obligee, it is called a Blanket Fidelity Bond.
aa. Individual Fidelity Bond - certain forms of employment which
entail the handling of money or property expose the employer to
a peculiar hazard. Positions such as those of a cashier, agent,
property custodian, collector, etc. present a great deal of
temptation to the employee and properly attributed to dishonest
acts of employees. To protect himself from such losses, the
employer often requires a bond from applicants for employment in
such positions of trust. This is the Individual Fidelity Bond which,
in effect, guarantees the personal honesty of the Principal. The
bond will indemnify the employer, arising out of dishonest acts of
an employee. By the terms of the bond, the Company’s liability
will attach if the court finds the act:
1. amount to “estafa” within the meaning of the penal code;
payment to be made only upon the presentation of the
final judgement of the court; and
2. was committed in the course of the position held by the
employee and during the term of the bond.
There are various forms of blanket fidelity bonds covering either selected
employees only of company or all of its employees, to secure the company
against losses through dishonest or fraudulent acts of said employees. Unlike
the individual fidelity bonds all the existing forms of blanket fidelity bonds do not
contain the condition precedent to recovery, of a prior conviction for “estafa”.
Furthermore, in the case of blanket fidelity bonds, only the employer and the
surety company are involved in the negotiations for the coverage since the
employees themselves may or may not be aware that they had been bonded by
their employer; hence this partakes of the nature of insurance more than of
suretyship. Lastly, premiums for the blanket fidelity bonds are based on the
probability of loss just like in insurance contracts.
8. DISTINCTION BETWEEN BOND AND INSURANCE
The essential differences between Suretyship and the other non-life insurance
lines are: 
a) as to the nature of the contract - Insurance is basically a primary
contract while a bonding contract is secondary in nature since it is based
on some other contract or undertaking.
b) As to the contracts involved - in insurance, there is only one major
contract, the insurance policy. A suretyship consists of three contractsthe
primary contract, the bond and the Counter Guarantee Agreement.
c) As to the parties involved - there are only two (2) parties involved in an
insurance Contract-the Insured and the Insurer. However, in a bond,
there re three parties involved-the Surety, the Principal and the Obligee.
d) As to the protection - an insurance protects the buyer or the insured
while a bond protects a third party or the obligee.
e) As to the cancellation - insurance contracts are subject to cancellation
by both the insured and the insurer, whereas Surety bonds generally can
be cancelled only by the obligee, regardless of the wishes of the Principal
or the Surety.
f) As to the premium - in an insurance contract, the company takes all the
risk, and premium is computed on the probability of loss based on the
accrued or expected experience. The premium is the whole consideration
for the insurance contract. However, the premium paid in a bond is only
a service fee for the extension of credit because surety contracts are
simply credit instruments.
g) As to claim - since insurance is based upon the sharing by many of the
losses of the relatively few, the claim in an insurance contract is a loss.
In suretyship, however, no losses are expected. The claim paid in
suretyship is only a loan. Losses, of course do occur, but in such event,
the surety usually has the right to subrogation, or salvage, in its effort to
recoup its losses from the defaulting principal, since the principal is
primarily liable.
9. UNDERWRITING OF BONDS
The underwriting of bonds follows almost the same procedures as in other lines
of insurance. Of course, the experience of the underwriter plays a very
important part in the right approach to proper evaluation of underwriting
information and other pertinent data which are essential to the underwriter in
forming a basis for his decision. But before one could begin to underwrite
bonds, he would first be well versed with bonding practices. First of all, he must,
for instance, always be aware of the cardinal rule that the surety is not supposed
to incur any loss since bonding in reality is a lending or extending of credit or
accommodation. 
The underwriter has to go thru the following procedure before he arrives at a
decision as to whether a bond should be written or not, to wit: Underwriting
Information - the underwriter follows a set of rules in this respect. He should
require of the bond applicant that the following papers be filled up and
submitted:
a) Bond Application Form
b) Copy of the contract to be guaranteed by the bond (primary contract)
c) Co-Signer’s Statements to be filled up by the proposed Co-Signers
d) Documents evidencing principal’s legal existence if applicant is an entity
other than a natural person.
e) Principal’s Audited Financial Statement for the past three years by
reputable accounting firm
f) Such other information which to the underwriter’s mind are material to
his assessment of the risk. 
INSURANCE CLAIMS
1. PROPER CLAIM ATTITUTE
It is important for both the Insureds and the Insurance Companies to have
proper claim attitude because such proper claim attitude is the key to settle
claims expeditiously.
Insureds must realize that insurance is a social device to indemnify those who
suffer losses. It is not a device for them to make profits. Thus, they should not
claim where there is no loss. Neither should they claim for more than what they
actually have lost. Such, among a number of others, are not proper claim
attitude.
Insurance companies should also consider insurance as a social device primarily
for the purpose of offering protection to the insuring public against various types
of perils. That in the event someone should suffer losses as a result of the
occurrence of such perils, he would be compensated. Making profit out of
insurance operations should be considered secondary or incidental. Thus,
insurers should always strive to compensate legitimate claimants as quickly as
possible. Valid claims should be settled at the earliest possible time. Such,
among a number of others, may be considered as the proper claim attitude of
Insurance companies.
2. ADJUSTER
A) What is an Adjuster?
An adjuster is an individual person, a partnership, an association or
corporation which for a fee or anything of value, acts for or represents an
insurance company or an Insured in the settlement of insurance claims
and is duly licensed by the proper government agency.
B) Kinds of Adjusters
Adjusters may be classified into 3 kinds, namely:
a) Independent Adjusters - these are adjusters who may be
defined as above, except that they represent or act for and in
behalf of insurance companies. 
b) Public Adjusters - these are also adjusters as defined above,
except that they act for or represent only the Insureds.
c) Company or In-House Adjusters - these are salaried
employees of an insurance company who are usually assigned to
handle simpler adjustments and are not required to be licensed by
government agency.
C) Functions of Adjusters
Once the functions of adjusters are enumerated, it could be realized
immediately why they are needed.
a) Handling Claims - the primary function of adjusters, of course,
would be to handle insurance claims either for the insured or the
insurance company in order to expedite claim settlement.
b) Relieve Claim Burden - Adjusters relieve claim burden of
insurance executives, so that they do not have to handle claims
themselves and may thus attend to their other work.
c) Reports Serve as Evidence of Loss - Adjuster’s reports on
loss cases assigned to them serve as evidence of loss as between
the insurance companies and their reinsurers.
d) Minimize Fraudulent Claims - it is unavoidable that insurance
companies will come across fraudulent claims from time to time.
Good adjusters would be able to either eliminate or minimize such
fraudulent claims.
e) Serve as Buffer Element - Adjusters normally will serve as a
buffer element between an Insured and an insurance company.
Tempers very often rise between them. Adjusters serve as
cushions.
f) Protects Legitimate Rights - in so far as public adjusters are
concerned, they protect the legitimate rights of the Insureds.
3. AGENTS’ DUTIES IN CLAIM ADJUSTMENT
In case of claim it would be an agents’ duty to assist the Insured in filing his
notice and other documents and to see to it that his rights are protected. 
The agent should see to it that claims are settled expeditiously without
unnecessary delay and the Insured is indemnified properly.
It is also the duty of an agent to protect his company from fraudulent claims and
to see to it that his company will not be compelled to pay more than what it is
liable.
In other words, an agent should exercise utmost efforts in effecting a fair
settlement of any claim.
4. ARBITRATION & ADJUDICATIONS
A) Arbitration - is a process provided under an insurance policy by which
an insured and an insurance company are required to settle amicably
claim disputes on amount of loss without litigation.
B) Adjudication - is an authority granted to the Government insurance
agency to hear or adjudicate insurance claims or complaints provided
such cases do not exceed certain limits in any one single claim.
C) Relationship between Arbitration and Adjudication.
a. Arbitration is a contractual provision while adjudication is a legal
provision.
b. Adjudication has broader scope as it encompasses disputes on
liability.
c. Once adjudication is invoked, arbitration becomes academic.
d. If the law does not so provide, adjudication may be invoked
without passing through arbitration.
e. Even after an award is rendered in arbitration, adjudication, may
still be invoked.
5. EX-GRATIA PAYMENT
A) What is “Ex-Gratia Payment”
An ex-gratia payment is a payment made by an insurance company for
loss which it is not legally liable or has no legal liability to pay. 
B) Reasons for Ex-Gratia Payments
Ex-gratia payments are made primarily for 2 reasons:
a. To earn goodwill
b. To obtain additional volume of business
6. GENERAL CLAIM PROCEDURES
Different lines of insurance have different claim procedures to follow. However,
there are certain features or steps that are common to all. These are then
known as the General Claims Procedures. These are the claim procedures that
are common to all kinds of insurance.
A) Notice of Loss
In any kind of insurance, whenever there is a loss, notice of such loss
must be given to the Insurer in the manner provided under the policy
concerned. Unless the policy provided otherwise notice may be given
either orally or in writing and such notice must be given without
unnecessary delay. An insurance company cannot be held liable unless
notice is given.
B) Investigation of Loss
Upon receipt of a notice of claim, an insurance company will either assign
the same to an independent adjuster or its own company adjuster for
investigation in order to determine the validity or compensability of such
claim.
Investigation would involve on-site inspection, interviewing witnesses,
gathering pertinent documents and studying the policy as to the
coverage, exclusions and conditions and violations if any. All of these are
for the determination of the validity of the claim filed.
C) Adjustment or Denial of Loss
If after investigation, the adjuster believes that the claim is not valid or
not compensable, he will then recommend to the assigning company for
denial, if the claim is found to be valid and compensable, then negotiation
or adjustment will be initiated immediately.
Adjustment work would involve the determination of the extent of loss or
damage, valuation of property insured, measure of interest and the
application of average clause if applicable. All of these will finally
determine the amount payable. 
D) Settlement of Loss
When the liability of an insurance company is established and admitted
and the amount of loss payable is also determined, all that remain to be
done is to pay.
Normally, this is a simple procedure, unless complications arise which
could involve problems of:
a. Mortgagee
b. Mutual Accounts
c. Garnishments
d. Beneficiaries
 
 Types of insurance
       Any     risk that can be quantified can potentially be insured.. Below are

exhaustive lists of the many different types of insurance that exist. A single
policy may cover risks in one or more of the categories set out below. For
example, vehicle insurance would typically cover both the property risk (theft or
damage to the vehicle) and the liability risk (legal claims arising from
an accident). A home insurance policy in the U.S. typically includes coverage
for damage to the home and the owner's belongings, certain legal claims
against the owner, and even a small amount of coverage for medical expenses
of guests who are injured on the owner's property.
                Type of insurance
Life Insurance                                  
Home Insurance
Property Insurance                  
Auto Insurance
Health Insurance
Life Insurance
Life insurance provides a monetary benefit to a descendant's family or other
  designated beneficiary, and may specifically provide for income to an insured person's family, burial, funeral and other final expenses. Life insurance policies often allow the option of having the proceeds paid to the beneficiary either in a lump sum cash payment or an annuity.
Annuities provide a stream of payments and are generally classified as
 insurance because they are issued by insurance companies, are regulated as
 insurance, and require the same kinds of actuarial and investment
 management expertise that life insurance requires.
Life Insurance

Certain life insurance contracts accumulate cash values, which may be
taken by the insured if the policy is surrendered or which may be borrowed against. Some policies, such as annuities andendowment policies, are financial instruments to accumulate or liquidate wealth when it
  is needed.
In many countries, such as the U.S. and the UK, the tax law provides that
the interest on this cash value is not taxable under certain circumstances.
This leads to widespread use of life insurance as a tax-efficient method of saving as well as protection in the event of early death.
Home Insurance
Home insurance provides coverage for damage or destruction of the policyholder's home. In some geographical areas, the policy may exclude certain types of risks, such as flood or earthquake, that require additional coverage. Maintenance-related issues are typically the homeowner's responsibility. The policy may include inventory, or this can be bought as a separate policy, especially for people who rent housing. In some
  countries, insurers offer a package which may include liability and legal
  responsibility for injuries and property damage caused by members of the
  household, including pets 
Accident, sickness
Insurance
Under this category there are four type of insurance are there
1.  Health insurance
2.  Disability insurance
    long term disability
    Short term disability
    Total Permanent disability
Disability overhead insurance
Workers' compensation insurance
Health Insurance


        Health insurance policies issued
by publicly-funded health programs, such
as cost of medical treatments.
        Dental insurance, like medical
insurance, is protects policyholders for
dental costs. In the U.S. and Canada,
dental insurance is often part of an
employer's benefits package, along with
health insurance.

Disability insurance

· Disability insurance policies provide financial support in the
  event of the policyholder becoming unable to work because of
  disabling illness or injury. It provides monthly support to help
  pay such obligations as mortgage loans and credit cards. Short-
  term and long-term disability policies are available to individuals,
  but considering the expense, long-term policies are generally
  obtained only by those with at least six-figure incomes, such as
  doctors, lawyers, etc. Short-term disability insurance covers a
  person for a period typically up to six months, paying a stipend
  each month to cover medical bills and other necessities

· Long-term disability insurance covers an individual's expenses for the
  long term, up until such time as they are considered permanently disabled
  and thereafter. Insurance companies will often try to encourage the person
  back into employment in preference to and before declaring them unable to
  work at all and therefore totally disabled.
· Disability overhead insurance allows business owners to cover the
  overhead expenses of their business while they are unable to work.
· Total permanent disability insurance provides benefits when a person is
  permanently disabled and can no longer work in their profession, often
  taken as an adjunct to life insurance.
· Workers' compensation insurance replaces all or part of a
  worker's wages lost and accompanying medical expenses incurred because
  of a job-related injury.

Property Insurance


Property insurance provides protection against risks to property, such
  as fire, theft or weather damage. This may include specialized forms of
  insurance such as fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake
  insurance, home insurance, inland marine insurance or boiler insurance.,
  be used as a broad category of various subtypes of insurance, some of
  which are listed below:

                                Fire insurance



                Fire insurance is a insurance that cover property,
such as home shop or other fixed asset protection against fire,
burn Etc..
It also cover distraction of property due to fire

                               Aviation insurance



      Aviation insurance protects aircraft hulls and spares, and
associated liability risks, such as passenger and third-party
liability. Airports may also appear under this subcategory,
including air traffic control and refuelling operations for
international airports through to smaller domestic exposures.

                             Boiler insurance



    Boiler insurance (also known as boiler and machinery
insurance, or equipment breakdown insurance) insures against
accidental physical damage to boilers, equipment or machinery.

                                     Builder's Risk insurance


         Builder's risk insurance insures against the risk of
physical loss or damage to property during construction.
Builder's risk insurance is typically written on an "all risk" basis
covering damage arising from any not otherwise expressly
excluded. Builder's risk insurance is coverage that protects a
person's or organization's insurable interest in materials,
fixtures and/or equipment being used in the construction or
renovation of a building or structure should those items sustain
physical loss or damage from an insured peril.

                             Crop insurance


     Crop insurance may be purchased by farmers to reduce
or manage various risks associated with growing crops. Such
risks include crop loss or damage caused by weather, hail,
drought, frost damage, insects, or disease.

                             Earthquake insurance


     Earthquake insurance is a form of property insurance that
pays the policyholder in the event of an earthquake that causes
damage to the property. Most ordinary home insurance policies
do not cover earthquake damage. Earthquake insurance
policies generally feature a high deductible. Rates depend on
location and hence the likelihood of an earthquake, as well as
the construction of the home.

                                      Flood insurance


· Flood insurance protects against property loss due to flooding.
  Many insurers in the U.S. do not provide flood insurance in
  some parts of the country. In response to this, the federal
  government created the National Flood Insurance
  Program which serves as the insurer of last resort.

                                   Marine insurance


              Marine insurance and marine cargo insurance cover the
loss or damage of vessels at sea or on inland waterways, and of cargo
in transit, regardless of the method of transit. When the owner of the
cargo and the carrier are separate corporations, marine cargo
insurance typically compensates the owner of cargo for losses
sustained from fire, shipwreck, etc., but excludes losses that can be
recovered from the carrier or the carrier's insurance. Many marine
insurance underwriters will include "time element" coverage in such
policies, which extends the indemnity to cover loss of profit and other
business expenses attributable to the delay caused by a covered loss.

                                natural disaster insurance


       natural disaster insurance covers specified expenses
  after a natural disaster renders the policyholder's home
  uninhabitable. Periodic payments are made directly to the
  insured until the home is rebuilt or a specified time period has
  elapsed.
· Volcano insurance
· Windstorm insurance

                                Terrorism insurance


       Terrorism insurance provides protection against any loss
  or damage caused by terrorist activities. In the U.S. in the wake
  of 9/11, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act 2002 (TRIA) set up a
  federal Program providing a transparent system of shared public
  and private compensation for insured losses resulting from acts
  of terrorism.
The demand for terrorism insurance surged after 9/11

                         Other types
· All-risk insurance
· Bloodstock insurance
· Business interruption insurance
· Collateral protection insurance.
· Legal expenses insurance
· Locked funds insurance
· Livestock
· Nuclear incident insurance
· Pet insurance.
· Pollution insurance
· Travel insurance

Type of insurance
Life Insurance                                  
Home Insurance
Property Insurance                  
Auto Insurance
Health Insurance

Classification of Insurance - Life
Life Insurance
— It is a contract between the insured person and the
company or "carrier" that is providing the insurance.
— It offers a way to replace the loss of income that
occurs when the insured person dies, usually the
person who is the majority income provider of the
family.
— If the death of the insured occurs while the contract
is in force, the insurance company pays a specified
sum of money free of income tax to the person named
as beneficiary.
— It can also be a form of savings in the long run where
there is the option of contributing regularly.
    
 Provides
 Continuity of income
 Mortgage protection
 Protection against disabilities
 Children's education
 Marriage expenditure
 Retirement fund
 Tax relief
”Peace Of Mind”

Types of Life Insurance
Temporary life insurance (Term)
— This provides coverage for a limitedtferiod of time for a
premium. After that perio , the insured can either
rop the policy or pay annually increasing premiums to continue
the coverage.
— The death benefit would be paid by the insurance company if
the insured died during the term of the policy, while no benefit
is paid if the insured dies after the last day of the term of the
po icy.
— These have the lowest possible premium among all insurance
plans. There is complete absence of survival benefit and on
maturity no death benefit money is provided.
' Permanent
— Life insurance that remains in force until the policy matures, or
unless the policy lapses. Such policy is for the life of the insured.
- The payout is assured at the end of the policy.
  non life insurance Also known as General Insurance, is a form of
insurance mainly concerned with protecting
the policyholderfrom loss or damage caused
by specific risks.
- Categorized depending on the need level
— Property/ Casualty non life Insurance
— Health and Disability non life Insurance
— Business and Commercial non life Insurance
    
Types of non life insurance
non life Agricultural - 
non life Homeinsurance
non life Aviation 
non life Marine
non life Carinsurance 
non life Motor
non life Engineering 
non life Shop/office
non life Fire insurance
non life Travelinsurance
Critical illness Insurance